Dedication

To the impeccable poet
To the pefect magician of French letters 
To my very dear and very revered
Master and friend
Theophile Gautier
With sentiments
Of the most profound humility
I dedicate
These unhealthy flowers
C.B.

To the Reader

Folly, error, sin, avarice 
Occupy our minds and labor our bodies, 
And we feed our pleasant remorse 
As beggars nourish their vermin.

Our sins are obstinate, our repentance is faint; 
We exact a high price for our confessions, 
And we gaily return to the miry path, 
Believing that base tears wash away all our stains.

On the pillow of evil Satan, Trismegist, 
Incessantly lulls our enchanted minds, 
And the noble metal of our will 
Is wholly vaporized by this wise alchemist.

The Devil holds the strings which move us! 
In repugnant things we discover charms; 
Every day we descend a step further toward Hell, 
Without horror, through gloom that stinks.

Like a penniless rake who with kisses and bites 
Tortures the breast of an old prostitute, 
We steal as we pass by a clandestine pleasure 
That we squeeze very hard like a dried up orange.

Serried, swarming, like a million maggots, 
A legion of Demons carouses in our brains, 
And when we breathe, Death, that unseen river, 
Descends into our lungs with muffled wails.

If rape, poison, daggers, arson 
Have not yet embroidered with their pleasing designs 
The banal canvas of our pitiable lives, 
It is because our souls have not enough boldness.

But among the jackals, the panthers, the bitch hounds,
The apes, the scorpions, the vultures, the serpents,
The yelping, howling, growling, crawling monsters,
In the filthy menagerie of our vices,

There is one more ugly, more wicked, more filthy! 
Although he makes neither great gestures nor great cries, 
He would willingly make of the earth a shambles 
And, in a yawn, swallow the world;

He is Ennui! -- His eye watery as though with tears, 
He dreams of scaffolds as he smokes his hookah pipe.
You know him reader, that refined monster,
-- Hypocritish reader, -- my fellow, -- my brother!

To the Reader

Folly and error, avarice and vice, 
Employ our souls and waste our bodies' force. 
As mangey beggars incubate their lice, 
We nourish our innocuous remorse.

Our sins are stubborn, craven our repentance. 
For our weak vows we ask excessive prices. 
Trusting our tears will wash away the sentence, 
We sneak off where the muddy road entices.

Cradled in evil, that Thrice-Great Magician, 
The Devil, rocks our souls, that can't resist; 
And the rich metal of our own volition 
Is vaporised by that sage alchemist.

The Devil pulls the strings by which we're worked: 
By all revolting objects lured, we slink 
Hellwards; each day down one more step we're jerked 
Feeling no horror, through the shades that stink.

Just as a lustful pauper bites and kisses 
The scarred and shrivelled breast of an old whore, 
We steal, along the roadside, furtive blisses, 
Squeezing them, like stale oranges, for more.

Packed tight, like hives of maggots, thickly seething
Within our brains a host of demons surges. 
Deep down into our lungs at every breathing, 
Death flows, an unseen river, moaning dirges.

If rape or arson, poison, or the knife 
Has wove no pleasing patterns in the stuff 
Of this drab canvas we accept as life -- 
It is because we are not bold enough!

Amongst the jackals, leopards, mongrels, apes, 
Snakes, scorpions, vultures, that with hellish din, 
Squeal, roar, writhe, gambol, crawl, with monstrous shapes, 
In each man's foul menagerie of sin -- 

There's one more damned than all. He never gambols,
Nor crawls, nor roars, but, from the rest withdrawn,
Gladly of this whole earth would make a shambles
And swallow up existence with a yawn...

Boredom! He smokes his hookah, while he dreams 
Of gibbets, weeping tears he cannot smother. 
You know this dainty monster, too, it seems -- 
Hypocrite reader! -- You! -- My twin! -- My brother!

To the Reader

Folly, error, sin and avarice
Occupy our minds and waste our bodies,
And we feed our polite remorse
As beggars feed their lice.

Our sins are stubborn, our repentance is cowardly;
We ask high prices for our vows,
And we gaily return to the muddy road,
Believing we will wash away all our spots with vile tears.

On the pillow of evil it is Thrice-Great Satan
Who endlessly rocks our bewitched mind,
And the rich metal of our will
Is vaporized by that wise chemist.

It is the Devil who pulls the strings that move us!
In repulsive objects we find enticing lures;
Each day we go down one more step toward Hell,
Without horror, through the darkness which smells rank.

Just as a lustful pauper who kisses and bites
The martyred breast of an aged whore,
We steal, as we move along, a clandestine pleasure
Which we squeeze hard like an old orange.

Packed tight and swarming like a million maggots,
A crowd of Demons carouse in our brains,
And, when we breathe, Death into our lungs
Descends, an invisible river, with heavy wailings.

If rape, poison, the knife and arson
Have not yet woven with their pleasing patterns
The banal canvas of our pitiful fate,
It is because our soul, alas, is not bold enough.

But among the jackals, panthers, bitches,
Monkeys, scorpions, vultures, serpents,
The monsters squealing, yelling, grunting, crawling
In the infamous menagerie of our vices

There is one uglier, more wicked and more foul than all!
Although he does not make great gestures or great cries,
He would gladly make the earth a shambles
And swallow the world in a yawn;

It is boredom! his eyes weeping an involuntary tear,
He dreams of gibbets as he smokes his hookah.
You know him, reader, this delicate monster,
-- Hypocrite reader -- my twin -- my brother!

To the Reader

Folly and error, sin and avarice, 
Labor our minds and bodies in their course, 
Blithely we nourish pleasurable remorse 
As beggars feed their parasitic lice.

Our sins are stubborn, our repentance faint, 
We sell our weak confessions at high price, 
Returning gaily to the bogs of vice, 
Thinking base tears can cleanse our every taint.

Pillowed on evil, Satan Trismegist 
Ceaselessly cradles our enchanted mind, 
The flawless metal of our will we find 
Volatilized by this rare alchemist.

The Devil holds the puppet threads; and swayed 
By noisome things and their repugnant spell, 
Daily we take one further step toward Hell, 
Suffering no horror in the olid shade.

As an impoverished rake will kiss and bite 
The bruised blue nipples of an ancient whore, 
We steal clandestine pleasures by the score, 
Which, like dried orange rinds, we pressure tight.

Serried, aswarm, like million maggots, so
Demons carouse in us with fetid breath, 
And, when we breathe, the unseen stream of death 
Flows down our lungs with muffled wads of woe.

If poison, knife, rape, arson, have not dared 
Yet stamp the pleasing pattern of their gyves 
On the dull canvas of our sorry lives, 
It is because our torpid souls are scared.

But side by side with our monstrosities -- 
Jackals and bitch hounds, scorpions, vultures, apes,
Panthers and serpents whose repulsive shapes
Pollute our vice's dank menageries,

There is one viler and more wicked spawn, 
Which never makes great gestures or loud cries 
Yet would turn earth to wastes of sumps and sties 
And swallow all creation in a yawn:

Ennui! Moist-eyed perforce, worse than all other, 
Dreaming of stakes, he smokes his hookah pipe.
Reader, you know this fiend, refined and ripe, 
Reader, O hypocrite -- my like! -- my brother!

To the Reader

Infatuation, sadism, lust, avarice
possess our souls and drain the body's force;
we spoonfeed our adorable remorse,
like whores or beggars nourishing their lice.

Our sins are mulish, our confessions lies;
we play to the grandstand with our promises,
we pray for tears to wash our filthiness;
importantly pissing hogwash through our styes.

The devil, watching by our sickbeds, hissed
old smut and folk-songs to our soul, until
the soft and precious metal of our will
boiled off in vapor for this scientist.

Each day his flattery makes us eat a toad,
and each step forward is a step to hell,
unmoved, through previous corpses and their smell
asphyxiate our progress on this road.

Like the poor lush who cannot satisfy,
we try to force our sex with counterfeits,
die drooling on the deliquescent tits,
mouthing the rotten orange we suck dry.

Gangs of demons are boozing in our brain --
ranked, swarming, like a million warrior-ants,
they drown and choke the cistern of our wants;
each time we breathe, we tear our lungs with pain.

If poison, arson, sex, narcotics, knives
have not yet ruined us and stitched their quick,
loud patterns on the canvas of our lives,
it is because our souls are still too sick.

Among the vermin, jackals, panthers, lice,
gorillas and tarantulas that suck
and snatch and scratch and defecate and fuck
in the disorderly circus of our vice,

there's one more ugly and abortive birth.
It makes no gestures, never beats its breast,
yet it would murder for a moment's rest,
and willingly annihilate the earth.

It's BOREDOM. Tears have glued its eyes together.
You know it well, my Reader. This obscene
beast chain-smokes yawning for the guillotine --
you -- hypocrite Reader -- my double -- my brother!

To the Reader

Foolishness, error, sin, niggardliness, 
Occupy our minds and work on our bodies, 
And we feed our mild remorse, 
As beggars nourish their vermin.

Our sins are insistent, our repentings are limp;
We pay ourselves richly for our admissions,
And we gaily go once more on the filthy path
Believing that by cheap fears we shall wash away all our sins.

On the pillow of evil it is Satan Trismegistus
Who soothes a long while our bewitched mind,
And the rich metal of our determination
Is made vapor by that learned chemist.

It is the Devil who holds the reins which make us go!
In repulsive objects we find something charming;
Each day we take one more step towards Hell -- 
Without being horrified --  across darknesses that stink.

Like a beggarly sensualist who kisses and eats
The martyred breast of an ancient strumpet, 
We steal where we may a furtive pleasure 
Which we handle forcefully like an old orange.

Tight, swarming, like a million worms,
A population of Demons carries on in our brains,
And, when we breathe, Death into our lungs
Goes down, an invisible river, with thick complaints.

If rape, poison, the dagger, arson,
Have not as yet embroidered with their pleasing designs
The recurrent canvas of our pitiable destinies,
It is that our spirit, alas, is not brave enough.

But among the jackals, the panthers, the bitch-hounds, 
The apes, the scorpions, the vultures, the serpents, 
The monsters screeching, howling, grumbling, creeping,
In the infamous menagerie of our vices,

There is one uglier, wickeder, more shameless!
Although he makes no large gestures nor loud cries
He willingly would make rubbish of the earth
And with a yawn swallow the world;

He is Ennui! -- His eye filled with an unwished-for tear,
He dreams of scaffolds while puffing at his hookah.
You know him, reader, this exquisite monster,
-- Hypocrite reader, -- my likeness, -- my brother!

Benediction

When, after a decree of the supreme powers, 
The Poet is brought forth in this wearisome world, 
His mother terrified and full of blasphemies 
Raises her clenched fist to God, who pities her:

-- "Ah! would that I had spawned a whole knot of vipers
Rather than to have fed this derisive object!
Accursed be the night of ephemeral joy
When my belly conceived this, my expiation!

Since of all women You have chosen me
To be repugnant to my sorry spouse,
And since I cannot cast this misshapen monster
Into the flames, like an old love letter,

I shall spew the hatred with which you crush me down
On the cursed instrument of your malevolence,
And twist so hard this wretched tree
That it cannot put forth its pestilential buds!"

Thus she gulps down the froth of her hatred, 
And not understanding the eternal designs, 
Herself prepares deep down in Gehenna 
The pyre reserved for a mother's crimes.

However, protected by an unseen Angel, 
The outcast child is enrapt by the sun, 
And in all that he eats, in everything he drinks, 
He finds sweet ambrosia and rubiate nectar.

He cavorts with the wind, converses with the clouds, 
And singing, transported, goes the way of the cross; 
And the Angel who follows him on pilgrimage 
Weeps to see him as carefree as a bird.

All those whom he would love watch him with fear, 
Or, emboldened by his tranquility, 
Emulously attempt to wring a groan from him 
And test on him their inhumanity.

With the bread and the wine intended for his mouth 
They mix ashes and foul spittle, 
And, hypocrites, cast away what he touches 
And feel guilty if they have trod in his footprints.

His wife goes about the market-places 
Crying: "Since he finds me fair enough to adore, 
I shall imitate the idols of old, 
And like them I want to be regilded;

I shall get drunk with spikenard, incense, myrrh,
And with genuflections, viands and wine,
To see if laughingly I can usurp
In an admiring heart the homage due to God!

And when I tire of these impious jokes, 
I shall lay upon him my strong, my dainty hand; 
And my nails, like harpies' talons, 
Will cut a path straight to his heart.

That heart which flutters like a fledgling bird 
I'll tear, all bloody, from his breast, 
And scornfully I'll throw it in the dust 
To sate the hunger of my favorite hound!"

To Heav'n, where his eye sees a radiant throne, 
Piously, the Poet, serene, raises his arms, 
And the dazzling brightness of his illumined mind 
Hides from his sight the raging mob:

-- "Praise be to You, O God, who send us suffering
As a divine remedy for our impurities
And as the best and the purest essence
To prepare the strong for holy ecstasies!

I know that you reserve a place for the Poet 
Within the blessed ranks of the holy Legions, 
And that you invite him to the eternal feast 
Of the Thrones, the Virtues, and the Dominations.

I know that suffering is the sole nobility 
Which earth and hell shall never mar, 
And that to weave my mystic crown, 
You must tax every age and every universe.

But the lost jewels of ancient Palmyra,
The unfound metals, the pearls of the sea,
Set by Your own hand, would not be adequate
For that diadem of dazzling splendor,

For that crown will be made of nothing but pure light 
Drawn from the holy source of primal rays, 
Whereof our mortal eyes, in their fullest brightness, 
Are no more than tarnished, mournful mirrors!"

Benediction

When by an edict of the powers supreme 
A poet's born into this world's drab space, 
His mother starts, in horror, to blaspheme 
Clenching her fists at God, who grants her grace.

"Would that a nest of vipers I'd aborted 
Rather than this absurd abomination. 
Cursed be the night of pleasures vainly sported 
On which my womb conceived my expiation.

Since of all women I am picked by You
To be my Mate's aversion and his shame:
And since I cannot, like a billet-doux,
Consign this stunted monster to the flame,

I'll turn the hatred, which You load on me,
On the curst tool through which You work your spite,
And twist and stunt this miserable tree
Until it cannot burgeon for the blight."

She swallows down the white froth of her ire 
And, knowing naught of schemes that are sublime,
Deep in Gehenna, starts to lay the pyre 
That's consecrated to maternal crime.

Yet with an unseen Angel for protector 
The outcast waif grows drunken with the sun, 
And finds ambrosia, too, and rosy nectar 
In all he eats or drinks, suspecting none.

He sings upon his <i>Via Crucis,</i> plays 
With winds, and with the clouds exchanges words: 
The Spirit following his pilgrim-ways 
Weeps to behold him gayer than the birds.

Those he would love avoid him as in fear, 
Or, growing bold to see one so resigned, 
Compete to draw from him a cry or tear, 
And test on him the fierceness of their kind.

In food or drink that's destined for his taste 
They mix saliva foul with cinders black, 
Drop what he's touched with hypocrite distaste, 
And blame themselves for walking in his track.

His wife goes crying in the public way
-- "Since fair enough he finds me to adore, 
The part of ancient idols I will play 
And gild myself with coats of molten ore.

I will get drunk on incense, myrrh, and nard, 
On genuflexions, meat, and beady wine, 
Out of his crazed and wondering regard, 
I'll laugh to steal prerogatives divine.

When by such impious farces bored at length, 
I'll place my frail strong hand on him, and start, 
With nails like those of harpies in their strength, 
To plough myself a pathway to his heart.

Like a young bird that trembles palpitating, 
I'll wrench his heart, all crimson, from his chest, 
And to my favourite beast, his hunger sating, 
Will fling it in the gutter with a jest."

Skyward, to where he sees a Throne blaze splendid,
The pious Poet lifts his arms on high, 
And the vast lightnings of his soul extended 
Blot out the crowds and tumults from his eye.

"Blessed be You, O God, who give us pain, 
As cure for our impurity and wrong -- 
Essence that primes the stalwart to sustain 
Seraphic raptures that were else too strong.

I know that for the Poet You've a post, 
Where the blest Legions take their ranks and stations, 
Invited to the revels with the host 
Of Virtues, Powers, and Thrones, and Dominations

That grief's the sole nobility, I know it, 
Where neither Earth nor Hell can make attacks, 
And that, to deck my mystic crown of poet, 
All times and universes paid their tax.

But all the gems from old Palmyra lost, 
The ores unmixed, the pearls of the abyss, 
Set by Your hand, could not suffice the cost 
Of such a blazing diadem as this.

Because it will be only made of light, 
Drawn from the hearth of the essential rays, 
To which our mortal eyes, when burning bright, 
Are but the tarnished mirrors that they glaze."

The Blessing

When, by a decree of the sovereign powers,
The Poet comes into this bored world,
His mother, terrified and full of blasphemy,
Clenches her fists toward God, who has pity on her:

"Ah, why didn't I litter a nest of vipers,
Rather than give birth to this mockery?
A curse on that night with its fleeting pleasures
When my womb conceived my expiation!

Since you chose me from among all women
To be the disgust of my disappointed husband,
And since I cannot throw back into the fire
This weak monster, like a love letter,

I will make your hate which stifles me gush forth
On the accursed instrument of your plottings,
And I will twist this wretched tree so far
That its blighted buds will not grow!"

Thus she swallows the foam of her hate,
And, without understanding the eternal designs,
She prepares in the pit of Hell
The pyres consecrated to the crimes of a mother.

Meanwhile, under the invisible care of an Angel,
The disinherited Child is intoxicated with sunlight,
And in all he drinks and in all he eats
Discovers ambrosia and vermillion nectar.

He plays with the wind, talks with the cloud,
And singing revels in the way of the cross;
And the Spirit following him in his pilgrimage
Weeps at seeing him happy as a bird in the forest.

All those he would love look at him with fear,
Or, emboldened by his calm manner,
Vie with one another in drawing from him a complaint
And practice on him the experiments of their cruelty.

In the bread and wine destined for his mouth
They mingle ashes with filthy spittings;
Hypocritically they throw away what he touches,
And blame themselves for stepping where he stepped.

His wife cries in the public places:
"Since he finds me beautiful enough to worship,
I will take on the profession of ancient idols,
And like them I will cover my body with gold;

And I will get drunk on nard, incense, myrrh,
Genuflections, meats and wines,
To learn if I can from an admiring heart
Laughingly usurp the homage of the gods!

And, when I am bored with these impious farces,
I will lay on him my frail and strong hand;
And my nails, like the nails of harpies,
Will dig a path to his heart.

Like a very young bird trembling and palpitating
I will pull that red heart out from his breast,
And, in order to satiate my favorite beast,
Scornfully I will throw it to him on the ground!"

Toward Heaven, where his eyes see a shining throne,
The serene Poet raises his reverent arms,
And the vast visions of his lucid mind
Shut off from him the sight of cruel races:

"Be blessed, my Lord, who give suffering
As a divine remedy for our impurities
And as the best and the purest essence
Which prepares the strong for holy ecstasies!

I know that you keep a place for the Poet
In the blessed ranks of the holy legions,
And that you invite him to the eternal feast
Of Thrones, Virtues and Dominations.

I know that suffering is the one nobility
Where the earth and hell will have no effect,
And that in order to weave my mystic crown
All times and all worlds must be used.

But the lost jewels of ancient Palmyra,
The unknown metals, the pearls of the sea,
Mounted by your hand, could not suffice
For this handsome diadem shining and clear;

For it will be made only of pure light,
Drawn from the holy hearth of primal rays,
And to which mortal eyes, in their full splendor,
Are but tarnished and sad mirrors!"

Benediction

When by decree of the almighty powers, 
The Poet walks the world's wearisome sod, 
His mother, blasphemous and fearful, cowers, 
Clenching her fist against a pitying God:

-- "Ah, would whole knots of vipers were my spawn 
Rather than this woeful abomination! 
Cursed be the sweet swift night and evil dawn 
Wherein my womb conceived my expiation!

Since of all women Thou hast chosen me 
To be my sorry husband's shame of shames, 
Since I may not toss this monstrosity 
Like an old billet-doux into the flames,

Thy heavy hatred I shall vomit back 
On the damned tool of your malevolence, 
Twisting this wretched tree until it crack, 
Never to sprout in buds of pestilence!" 

Thus she gulps down the froth of her despair, 
Nor knowing the eternal paradigms, 
Sinks deep into Gehenna to prepare, 
Herself, the pyre set for a mother's crimes. 

Yet guarded by an unseen Angel's favors, 
The outcast child is fired by radiant suns, 
In all he eats and all he drinks he savors 
Ambrosial gifts and nectared benisons, 

He sports with winds, he talks with clouds, he keeps 
Singing along the road to Calvary, 
While the bright Angel in his traces weeps, 
Beholding him as free as birds are free.

All those whom he would love watch him with fear, 
Or else, made bold by his serenity, 
Wring groans from him that float sweet on the ear 
Making him touchstone of their cruelty.

With his due bread and wine, hypocrites, they, 
Mix ashes and fat gobs of spittle; grim, 
What he has touched, these humbugs cast away, 
Deeming it guilty but to follow him.

His wife cries in the market place: "Behold 
Since he adores me, I am fair, and fain, 
As idols did, and images of old, 
To be regilded and adored again.

I shall be drunk with spikenard, incense, myrrh,
With genuflections, viands and wine to see
If, as a glad usurper, I may stir
His heart to pay God's homages to me!

Tired of these impious japes and of their butt,
My strong lithe hand's caress with subtle art
And my sharp nails like harpy claws shall cut
A mortal path straight to his quivering heart.

That heart which flutters like a fledgling bird, 
I shall tear, bleeding, from his breast, to pitch 
It blandly in the dust without a word 
To slake the hunger of my favorite bitch."

To Heaven where he spies a splendent throne, 
Serene, the Poet lifts rapt arms; and bright 
Luminous thoughts that shine through him alone 
Conceal the furious rabble from his sight:

-- "Blessed, O God, who send woe for a cure, 
A balm divine for our impurities, 
Of essences the noblest and most pure 
To school the strong for holy ecstasies!

I know the Poet has his place above 
Amid God's saintly hosts and congregations, 
Guest at the everlasting banquet of 
The Thrones, the Virtues and the Dominations.

Sorrow alone is noble and august, 
A force nor earth nor hell shall ever mar, 
To weave my mystic crown I know you must 
Tax every age and universe that are.

Old Tadmor's vanished gems beyond all price, 
Metals unknown, pearls from the richest sea, 
Set by Thy holy hand, cannot suffice 
To match this dazzling chapter's splendency;

This diadem shall be of sheerest light, 
Drawn from the sacred source of primal rays, 
Whereof our mortal eyes, however bright, 
Serve but as piteous mirrors dull with glaze."

Benediction

When, on a certain day, into this harassed world 
The Poet, by decree of the high powers, was born, 
His mother, overwhelmed by shame and fury, hurled 
These blasphemies at God, clenching her fists in scorn:

"Would I had whelped a knot of vipers -- at the worst
'Twere better than this runt that whines and snivels there!
Oh, cursed be that night of pleasure, thrice accurst
My womb, that has conceived and nourished my despair!

"Since, of all mortal women, it would seem my fate
To be my saddened husband's horror and disgust;
And since I may not toss this monster in the grate -- 
Like any crumpled letter, reeking of stale lust -- 

"Upon his helpless form, whereby Thou humblest me,
I shall divert Thy hatred in one raging flood;
And I shall twist so well this miserable tree
That it shall not put forth one pestilential bud!"

Thus did she foam with anger, railing, swallowing froth; 
And, unaware of what the mighty powers had willed, 
She set about to draw Gehenna on them both, 
Eyeing the fire, considering how he might be killed.

Meantime, above the child an unseen angel beats 
His wings, and the poor waif runs laughing in the sun; 
And everything he drinks and everything he eats 
Are nectar and ambrosia to this hapless one.

Companioned by the wind, conversing with the cloud, 
Along the highway to the Cross his song is heard; 
And the bright Spirit, following him, weeps aloud 
To see him hop so gaily, like a little bird.

Those whom he longs to love observe him with constraint 
And fear, as he grows up; or, seeing how calm he is, 
Grow bold, and seek to draw from him some sharp complaint, 
Wreaking on him all day their dull ferocities.

Cinders are in his bread, are gritty in his teeth; 
Spittle is in his wine. Where his footprints are seen 
They hesitate to set their shoes, mincing beneath 
Hypocrisy; all things he touched, they call unclean.

His wife in public places cries, "Since after all
He loves me so, that he's the laughingstock of men,
I'll make a business of it, be an idol, call
For gold, to have myself regilded now and then!

"And some day, when I'm drunk with frankincense, rich food, 
Flattery, genuflexions, spikenard, beady wine, 
I'll get from him (while laughing in his face, I could!) 
That homage he has kept, so far, for things divine.

"And, when my pleasure in these impious farces fails, 
My dainty, terrible hands shall tear his breast apart, 
And these long nails of mine, so like to harpies' nails, 
Shall dig till they have dug a tunnel to his heart.

"Then, like a young bird, caught and fluttering to be freed, 
('Twill make a tasty morsel for my favorite hound) 
I'll wrench his heart out, warm and bleeding -- let it bleed! -- 
And drop it, with contempt and loathing, to the ground."

Meanwhile toward Heaven, the goal of his mature desire, 
The Poet, oblivious, lifts up his arms in prayer; 
His lucid essence flames with lightnings -- veiled by fire 
Is all the furious world, all the lewd conflict there.

"Be praised, Almighty God, that givest to faulty me 
This suffering, to purge my spirit of its sin, 
To fortify my puny strength, to bid me see 
Pure Faith, and what voluptuous blisses dwell therein.

"I know that in those ranks on ranks of happy blest 
The Poet shall have some place among Thy Seraphim; 
And that Thou wilt at length to the eternal feast 
Of Virtues, Thrones and Dominations, summon him.

"I know, Pain is the one nobility we have 
Which not the hungry ground nor hell shall ever gnaw; 
I know that space and time, beyond the temporal grave, 
Weave me a mystic crown, free from all earthly flaw.

"Not emeralds, not all the pearls of the deep sea, 
All the rare metals, every lost and buried gem 
Antique Palmyra hides, could ever seem to me 
So beautiful as that clear glittering diadem.

"Of Light, of Light alone, it will be fashioned, Light 
Drawn from the holy fount, rays primitive and pure, 
Whereof the eyes of mortal men, so starry bright, 
Are but the mirrors, mirrors cloudy and obscure."

The Blessing

When, by a decree of the sovereign power,
The poet makes his appearance in a bored world,
With fists clenched at the horror, his outraged mother
Calls on a pitying God, at whom these curses are hurled:

"Why was I not made to litter a brood of vipers
Rather than conceive this human mockery?
My curses on that night whose ephemeral pleasures
Filled my womb with this avenging treachery!

Since I must be chosen among all women that are
To bear the lifetime's grudge of a sullen husband,
And since I cannot get rid of this caricature,
-- Fling it away like old letters to be burned,

On what you have devised for my punishment
I will let all your hate of me rebound,
I will torture this stunted growth until its bent
Branches let fall every blighted bud to the ground!"

And so she prepares for herself in Hell's pit
A place on the pyre made for a mother's crimes,
Blind, in the fury of her foaming hatred,
To the meaning and purpose of the eternal designs.

Meanwhile, under the care of an unseen angel,
The disinherited Child revels in the sun's
Bright force; all that he eats and drinks can fill
Him with memories of the food that was heaven's.

The wind his plaything, any cloud a friend,
The Spirit watching can only weep to see
How in childhood his way of the cross is lightened
With the wild bird-song of his innocent gaiety.

Those he would love look at him with suspicion
Or else, emboldened by his calm, experiment
With various possible methods of exciting derision
By trying out their cruelty on his complaint.

They mix ashes or unspeakable filth with the bread
And the wine of his daily communion, drop
Whatever he may have touched with affected dread,
And studiously avoid wherever he may step.

His mistress, parading her contempt in the street,
Cries: "Since he finds my beauty a thing to worship,
I will be one of the ancient idols he talks about,
And make myself with gold out of the same workshop!

I will never have enough of his kneelings and offerings
Until I am sure that the choice foods, the wines,
The nard, the incense, the myrrh that he brings
He brings as other men would to the Virgin's shrines.

And when I am sick to death of trying not to laugh
At the farce of my black masses, I'll try the force
Of the hand he calls 'frail,' my nails will dig a path
Like harpies', to the heart that beats for me, of course!

Like a nestling trembling and palpitating
I will pull that red heart out of his breast
And throw it down for my favourite dog's eating
-- Let him do whatever he likes with the rest!"

A serene piety, lifting the poet's gaze,
Reveals heaven opening on a shining throne,
And the lower vision of the world's ravening rage
Is shut off by the sheet lightnings of his brain.

"Be blessed, oh my God, who givest suffering
As the only divine remedy for our folly,
As the highest and purest essence preparing
The strong in spirit for ecstasies most holy.

I know that among the uplifted legions
Of saints, a place awaits the Poet's arrival,
And that among the Powers, Virtues, Dominations
He too is summoned to Heaven's festival.

I know that sorrow is the one human strength
On which neither earth nor hell can impose,
And that all the universe and all time's length
Must be wound into the mystic crown for my brows.

But all the treasury of buried Palmyra,
The earth's unknown metals, the sea's pearls,
Mounted by Thy hand, would be deemed an inferior
Glitter, to his diadem that shines without jewels.

For Thou knowest it will be made of purest light
Drawn from the holy hearth of every primal ray,
To which all human eyes, if they were one bright
Eye, are only a tarnished mirror's fading day!"

Benediction

When, by the sovran will of Powers Eternal,
The poet passed into this weary world,
His mother, filled with fears and doubts infernal,
Clenching her hands towards Heaven these curses hurled.

 -- "Why rather did I not within me treasure
"A knot of serpents than this thing of scorn?
"Accursed be the night of fleeting pleasure
"Whence in my womb this chastisement was borne!

"Since thou hast chosen me to be the woman
"Whose loathsome fruitfulness her husband shames,
"Who may not cast aside this birth inhuman,
"As one that flings love-tokens to the flames,

"The hatred that on me thy vengeance launches
"On this thwart creature I will pour in flood:
"So twist the sapling that its withered branches
"Shall never once put forth a cankered bud!"

Regorging thus the venom of her malice,
And misconceiving thy decrees sublime,
In deep Gehenna's gulf she fills the chalice
Of torments destined to maternal crime.

Yet, safely sheltered by his viewless angel,
The Childe forsaken revels in the Sun;
And all his food and drink is an evangel
Of nectared sweets, sent by the Heavenly One.

He communes with the clouds, knows the wind's voices,
And on his pilgrimage enchanted sings;
Seeing how like the wild bird he rejoices
The hovering Spirit weeps and folds his wings.

All those he fain would love shrink back in terror,
Or, boldened by his fearlessness elate,
Seek to seduce him into sin and error,
And flesh on him the fierceness of their hate.

In bread and wine, wherewith his soul is nourished,
They mix their ashes and foul spume impure;
Lying they cast aside the things he cherished,
And curse the chance that made his steps their lure.

His spouse goes crying in the public places:
"Since he doth choose my beauty to adore,
"Aping those ancient idols Time defaces
"I would regild my glory as of yore.

"Nard, balm and myrrh shall tempt till he desires me
"With blandishments, with dainties and with wine,
"Laughing if in a heart that so admires me
"I may usurp the sovranty divine!

"Until aweary of love's impious orgies,
"Fastening on him my fingers firm and frail,
"These claws, keen as the harpy's when she gorges,
"Shall in the secret of his heart prevail.

"Then, thrilled and trembling like a young bird captured,
"The bleeding heart shall from his breast be torn;
"To glut his maw my wanton hound, enraptured,
"Shall see me fling it to the earth in scorn."

Heavenward, where he beholds a throne resplendent,
The poet lifts his hands, devout and proud,
And the vast lightnings of a soul transcendent
Veil from his gaze awhile the furious crowd: -- 

"Blessed be thou, my God, that givest sorrow,
"Sole remedy divine for things unclean,
"Whence souls robust a healing virtue borrow,
"That tempers them for sacred joys serene!

"I know thou hast ordained in blissful regions
"A place, a welcome in the festal bowers,
"To call the poet with thy holy Legions,
"Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers.

"I know that Sorrow is the strength of Heaven,
"'Gainst which in vain strive ravenous Earth and Hell,
"And that his crown must be of mysteries woven
"Whereof all worlds and ages hold the spell.

"But not antique Palmyra's buried treasure,
"Pearls of the sea, rare metal, precious gem,
"Though set by thine own hand could fill the measure
"Of beauty for his radiant diadem;

"For this thy light alone, intense and tender,
"Flows from the primal source of effluence pure,
"Whereof all mortal eyes, though bright their splendour,
"Are but the broken glass and glimpse obscure."

	The Sun

Along the old street on whose cottages are hung 
The slatted shutters which hide secret lecheries, 
When the cruel sun strikes with increased blows 
The city, the country, the roofs, and the wheat fields, 
I go alone to try my fanciful fencing, 
Scenting in every corner the chance of a rhyme, 
Stumbling over words as over paving stones, 
Colliding at times with lines dreamed of long ago.

This foster-father, enemy of chlorosis,
Makes verses bloom in the fields like roses;
He makes cares evaporate toward heaven,
And fills with honey hives and brains alike.
He rejuvenates those who go on crutches
And gives them the sweetness and gaiety of girls,
And commands crops to flourish and ripen
In those immortal hearts which ever wish to bloom!

When, like a poet, he goes down into cities, 
He ennobles the fate of the lowliest things 
And enters like a king, without servants or noise, 
All the hospitals and all the castles.

The Sun

Along the outskirts where, close-sheltering 
Hid lusts, dilapidated shutters swing, 
When the sun strikes, redoubling waves of heat 
On town, and field, and roof, and dusty street -- 
I prowl to air my prowess and kill time, 
Stalking, in likely nooks, the odds of rhyme, 
Tripping on words like cobbles as I go 
And bumping into lines dreamed long ago.

This all-providing Sire, foe to chloroses, 
Wakes verses in the fields as well as roses 
Evaporates one's cares into the breeze, 
Filling with honey brains and hives of bees, 
Rejuvenating those who go on crutches 
And bringing youthful joy to all he touches, 
Life to those precious harvests he imparts 
That grow and ripen in our deathless hearts.

Poet-like, through the town he seems to smile 
Ennobling fate for all that is most vile; 
And king-like, without servants or display, 
Through hospitals and mansions makes his way.

The Sun

In this old district, where the shabby houses hide 
Behind drawn shutters many a furtive lust inside, 
In the fierce rays of noon, which mercilessly beat 
On town and country, on the roofs and on the wheat, 
I walk alone, absorbed in my fantastic play, -- 
Fencing with rhymes, which, parrying nimbly, back away; 
Tripping on words, as on rough paving in the street, 
Or bumping into verses I long had dreamed to meet.

The sun, our nourishing father, anemia's deadly foe, 
Makes poems, as if poems were roses, bud and grow; 
Burns through the anxious mists of every mind alive, 
And fills with honey the celled brain as the celled hive. 
'Tis he who makes the man on crutches stump along 
As gay as a young girl, humming as sweet a song; 
Calls to the human spirit to climb and ripen still -- 
Which would bloom on for ever, could it have its will.

He goes into the city, where, like the poet, his light 
Ennobles and gives purpose to the least thing in sight; 
Or, quietly, unattended, like a king, he calls 
At every palace, and visits all the hospitals.

Elevation

Above the lakes, above the vales,
The mountains and the woods, the clouds, the seas,
Beyond the sun, beyond the ether,
Beyond the confines of the starry spheres,

My soul, you move with ease, 
And like a strong swimmer in rapture in the wave 
You wing your way blithely through boundless space 
With virile joy unspeakable.

Fly far, far away from this baneful miasma 
And purify yourself in the celestial air, 
Drink the ethereal fire of those limpid regions 
As you would the purest of heavenly nectars.

Beyond the vast sorrows and all the vexations
That weigh upon our lives and obscure our vision,
Happy is he who can with his vigorous wing
Soar up towards those fields luminous and serene,

He whose thoughts, like skylarks,
Toward the morning sky take flight
-- Who hovers over life and understands with ease
The language of flowers and silent things!

Elevation

Above the valleys and the lakes: beyond
The woods, seas, clouds and mountain-ranges: far
Above the sun, the aethers silver-swanned
With nebulae, and the remotest star,

My spirit! with agility you move 
Like a strong swimmer with the seas to fight, 
Through the blue vastness furrowing your groove
With an ineffable and male delight.

Far from these foetid marshes, be made pure
In the pure air of the superior sky, 
And drink, like some most exquisite liqueur, 
The fire that fills the lucid realms on high.

Beyond where cares or boredom hold dominion, 
Which charge our fogged existence with their spleen, 
Happy is he who with a stalwart pinion 
Can seek those fields so shining and serene:

Whose thoughts, like larks, rise on the freshening breeze 
Who fans the morning with his tameless wings, 
Skims over life, and understands with ease 
The speech of flowers and other voiceless things.

Up

Above the valleys, above the mountains, above the sea,
Above the mists that rise at morning from river and pond -- 
Beyond the sun, beyond the fringe of the ether, beyond
The boundaries of the fields of stars and nebulae,

With what deep bliss, with what insatiable delight,
My soul, like a good swimmer reveling in the wave,
You plunge into immensity! With what a grave
Mute joy you saturate yourself in the clear height!

Fly! Oh, indeed, fly far from this unwholesome place! 
Go and be purged in radiance, wheeling higher and higher: 
Be drunken, be washed through with the transparent fire, 
Be lost in the serene bright solitudes of space!

From these low vapors hanging in the windless air,
From these miasmas fraught with ancient woe and ill,
Most blest, most fortunate is he who can at will
Take flight into a region luminous and fair -- 

He whose unwearied thoughts on effortless light wings
Go up like larks at morning, and circle without fear
Above the wakening land -- aloof and free -- and hear
The voices of the flowers and of all voiceless things!

Elevation

Above ponds, above valleys,
Mountains, woods, clouds, seas,
Beyond the sun, beyond the ether,
Beyond the limits of the starry spheres,

My spirit, you move with agility,
And, like a good swimmer who collapses in the water,
You gaily furrow the deep expanse
With an unspeakable male delight.

Fly far away from these fetid marshes;
Purify yourself in the upper air,
And drink, like some pure divine liqueur,
The clear fire that fills the limpid spaces.

Behind the boredom and endless cares
Which burden our fogged existence with their weight,
Happy is the man who can with vigorous wing
Mount to those luminous serene fields!

The man whose thoughts, like larks,
Take liberated flight toward the morning skies
-- Who hovers over life and understands without effort
The language of flowers and voiceless things!

Elevation

above the valleys and above the meres,
above the mountains, woods, the clouds, the sea,
beyond the sun, beyond the canopy
of aether, and beyond the starry spheres,

o Mind, thou soarest easily and well,
and like a swimmer tranced in lifting seas,
thou cleavest all those deep immensities,
thrilled by a manly joy ineffable.

fly far beyond this fog of pestilence; fly!
go purge thy squalor in the loftier air;
go quaff the pure Olympian ichor where
clear fires fill the whole pellucid sky.

behind the cares, the dark anxieties
that on our sunless hours drag and drift,
happy is he whom sturdy pinions lift
in spirit, toward those fields of light and peace;

o happy he whose thoughts, unfurling wings,
leap skyward like the lark at morning's call,
-- who soars above this life, resolving all
the speech of flowers and of voiceless things!

Elevation

Above the valleys and above the meres, 
The mountains and the woods, the clouds, the seas, 
Beyond the sun and ether distances, 
Beyond the confines of the starry spheres, 

Swiftly, my spirit, thou dost hold thy flight, 
And, as one swoons with joy on the sea's breast, 
Those calm eternal deeps thou furrowest 
With an ineffable and strong delight. 

Leave far beneath thy feet these pestilent places 
To bathe in upper air, and quench desire 
With unpolluted draughts of that clear fire 
Which fills the luminous and limpid spaces. 

O happy who can cast aside his chains, 
The heavy load of grief and weariness. 
And, winging from this misty wilderness, 
Can set his eyes on those far-shining plains! 

Whose lark-like thoughts, with bright, untrammelled wings, 
Spring upward when the morning skies are clear; 
Who soars o'er life, and effortless can hear 
The secret speech of flowers and dumb things! 

Correspondences

Nature is a temple in which living pillars 
Sometimes give voice to confused words; 
Man passes there through forests of symbols 
Which look at him with understanding eyes.

Like prolonged echoes mingling in the distance 
In a deep and tenebrous unity, 
Vast as the dark of night and as the light of day, 
Perfumes, sounds, and colors correspond.

There are perfumes as cool as the flesh of children,
Sweet as oboes, green as meadows
-- And others are corrupt, and rich, triumphant,

With power to expand into infinity,
Like amber and incense, musk, benzoin, 
That sing the ecstasy of the soul and senses.

Correspondences

Nature's a temple where each living column, 
At times, gives forth vague words. There Man advances 
Through forest-groves of symbols, strange and solemn, 
Who follow him with their familiar glances.

As long-drawn echoes mingle and transfuse 
Till in a deep, dark unison they swoon, 
Vast as the night or as the vault of noon -- 
So are commingled perfumes, sounds, and hues.

There can be perfumes cool as children's flesh,
Like fiddIes, sweet, like meadows greenly fresh.
Rich, complex, and triumphant, others roll

With the vast range of all non-finite things -- 
Amber, musk, incense, benjamin, each sings 
The transports of the senses and the soul.

Correspondences

All nature is one temple, the living aisles whereof 
Murmur in a soft language, half strange, half understood; 
Man wanders there as through a cabalistic wood, 
Aware of eyes that watch him in the leaves above.

Like voices echoing in his senses from beyond
Life's watery source, and which into one voice unite, 
Vast as the turning planet clothed in darkness and light, 
So do all sounds and hues and fragrances correspond.

Perfumes there are as sweet as the music of pipes and strings,
As pure as the naked flesh of children, as full of peace
As wide green prairies -- and there are others, having the whole

Corrupt proud all-pervasiveness of infinite things, 
Like frankincense, and musk, and myrrh, and ambergris, 
That cry of the ecstasy of the body and of the soul.

Correspondences

Nature is a temple where living pillars
At times allow confused words to come forth;
There man passes through forests of symbols
Which observe him with familiar eyes.

Like long echoes which in a distance are mingled
In a dark and profound unison
Vast as night is and light,
Perfumes, colors and sounds answer one another.

There are perfumes as cool as the flesh of children,
Sweet as oboes, green as prairies
-- And others, corrupt, rich and triumphant,

Having the expansion of infinite things,
Like amber, musk, myrrh and incense,
Which sing of the transports of the mind and the senses.

Correspondences

In Nature's temple, living pillars rise, 
Speaking sometimes in words of abstruse sense; 
Man walks through woods of symbols, dark and dense, 
Which gaze at him with fond familiar eyes. 
Like distant echoes blent in the beyond 
In unity, in a deep darksome way, 
Vast as black night and vast as splendent day, 
Perfumes and sounds and colors correspond.

Some scents are cool as children's flesh is cool, 
Sweet as are oboes, green as meadowlands, 
And others rich, corrupt, triumphant, full, 
Expanding as infinity expands: 
Benzoin or musk or amber that incenses, 
Hymning the ecstasy of soul and senses.

Echoes

In Nature's temple, living columns rise, 
Which oftentimes give tongue to words subdued, 
And Man traverses this symbolic wood, 
Which looks at him with half familiar eyes,

Like lingering echoes, which afar confound 
Themselves in deep and sombre unity, 
As vast as Night, and like transplendency, 
The scents and colours to each other respond. 

And scents there are, like infant's flesh as chaste, 
As sweet as oboes, and as meadows fair, 
And others, proud, corrupted, rich and vast, 

Which have the expansion of infinity, 
Like amber, musk and frankincense and myrrh, 
That sing the soul's and senses' ecstasy. 

Correspondances

Nature's a fane where down each corridor
of living pillars, darkling whispers roll,
-- a symbol-forest every pilgrim soul
must pierce, 'neath gazing eyes it knew before.

like echoes long that from afar rebound,
merged till one deep low shadowy note is born,
vast as the night or as the fires of morn,
sound calls to fragrance, colour calls to sound.

cool as an infant's brow some perfumes are,
softer than oboes, green as rainy leas;
others, corrupt, exultant, rich, unbar

wide infinities wherein we move at ease:
-- musk, ambergris, frankincense, benjamin
chant all our soul or sense can revel in.

<i>I Love to Think of Those Naked Epochs</i>

I love to think of those naked epochs
Whose statues Phoebus liked to tinge with gold.
At that time men and women, lithe and strong,
Tasted the thrill of love free from care and prudery,
And with the amorous sun caressing their loins
They gloried in the health of their noble bodies.
Then Cybele, generous with her fruits,
Did not find her children too heavy a burden;
A she-wolf from whose heart flowed boundless love for all,
She fed the universe from her tawny nipples.
Man, graceful, robust, strong, was justly proud
Of the beauties who proclaimed him their king;
Fruits unblemished and free from every scar,
Whose smooth, firm flesh invited biting kisses!

Today, when the Poet wishes to imagine
This primitive grandeur, in places where
Men and women show themselves in a state of nudity,
He feels a gloomy cold enveloping his soul
Before this dark picture full of terror.
Monstrosities bewailing their clothing!
Ridiculous torsos appropriate for masks!
Poor bodies, twisted, thin, bulging or flabby,

That the god Usefulness, implacable and calm,
Wrapped up at tender age in swaddling clothes of brass!
And you, women, alas! pale as candies,
Whom Debauch gnaws and feeds, and you, virgins,
Who trail the heritage of the maternal vice
And all the hideousness of fecundity!

Degenerate races, we have, it's true, 
Types of beauty unknown to the ancient peoples: 
Visages gnawed by cankers of the heart 
And what one might say were languor's marks of beauty; 
But these inventions of our backward Muses 
Will never prevent unhealthy races 
From paying to their youth deep and sincere homage,
-- To holy youth, with serene brow and guileless air, 
With eyes bright and clear, like a running brook, 
Which goes spreading over all things, as free from care 
As the blue of the sky, the birds and the flowers, 
Its perfumes, its songs and its sweet ardor!

<i>I Love the Thought of Those Old Naked Days</i>

I love the thought of those old naked days 
When Phoebus gilded torsos with his rays, 
When men and women sported, strong and fleet, 
Without anxiety or base deceit, 
And heaven caressed them, amorously keen 
To prove the health of each superb machine. 
Cybele then was lavish of her guerdon 
And did not find her sons too gross a burden: 
But, like a she-wolf, in her love great-hearted, 
Her full brown teats to all the world imparted. 
Bold, handsome, strong, Man, rightly, might evince 
Pride in the glories that proclaimed him prince -- 
Fruits pure of outrage, by the blight unsmitten, 
With firm, smooth flesh that cried out to be bitten.

Today the Poet, when he would assess 
Those native splendours in the nakedness 
Of man or woman, feels a sombre chill 
Enveloping his spirit and his will. 
He meets a gloomy picture, which be loathes, 
Wherein deformity cries out for clothes. 
Oh comic runts! Oh horror of burlesque! 
Lank, flabby, skewed, pot-bellied, and grotesque! 
Whom their smug god, Utility (poor brats!) 
Has swaddled in his brazen clouts "ersatz" 
As with cheap tinsel. Women tallow-pale, 
Both gnawed and nourished by debauch, who trail 
The heavy burden of maternal vice, 
Or of fecundity the hideous price.

We have (corrupted nations) it is true
Beauties the ancient people never knew -- 
Sad faces gnawed by cancers of the heart
And charms which morbid lassitudes impart. 
But these inventions of our tardy muse 
Can't force our ailing peoples to refuse 
Just tribute to the holiness of youth 
With its straightforward mien, its forehead couth, 
The limpid gaze, like running water bright, 
Diffusing, careless, through all things, like the light 
Of azure skies, the birds, the winds, the flowers, 
The songs, and perfumes, and heart-warming powers.

The Beacons

Rubens, the grove of case, Nepenthe's river 
Couch of cool flesh, where Love may never be, 
But where life ever flows and seems to quiver 
As air in heaven, or, in the sea, the sea.

Da Vinci, dusky mirror and profound, 
Where angels, smiling mystery, appear, 
Shaded by pines and glaciers, that surround 
And seem to shut their country in the rear.

Rembrandt, sad hospital of murmurs, where 
Adorned alone by one great crucifix, 
From offal-heaps exhales the weeping prayer 
That winter shoots a sunbeam to transfix.

Vague region, Michelangelo, where Titans 
Are mixed with Christs: and strong ghosts rise, in crowds 
To stand bolt upright in the gloom that lightens, 
With gristly talons tearing through their shrouds.

Rage of the boxer, mischief of the faun, 
Extracting beauty out of blackguards' looks -- 
The heart how proud, the man how pinched and drawn -- 
Puget the mournful emperor of crooks!

Watteau, the carnival, where famous hearts 
Go flitting by like butterflies that burn, 
While through gay scenes each chandelier imparts 
A madness to the dancers as they turn.

Goya's a nightmare full of things unguessed, 
Of foeti stewed on nights of witches' revels. 
Crones ogle mirrors; children scarcely dressed, 
Adjust their hose to tantalise the devils.

A lake of gore where fallen angels dwell 
Is Delacroix, by firwoods ever fair, 
Where under fretful skies strange fanfares swell 
Like Weber's sighs and heartbeats in the air.

These curses, blasphemies, and lamentations, 
These ecstasies, tears, cries and soaring psalms -- 
Through endless mazes, their reverberations 
Bring, to our mortal hearts, divinest balms.

A thousand sentinels repeat the cry. 
A thousand trumpets echo. Beacon-tossed 
A thousand summits flare it through the sky, 
A call of hunters in the jungle lost.

And certainly this is the most sublime 
Proof of our worth and value, Oh Divinity, 
That this great sob rolls on through ageless time 
To die upon the shores of your infinity.

Beacons

Rubens, garden of idleness watered by oblivion,
Where quick flesh pillows the impotence of dreams,
Where life's affluence writhes in eddying abandon
Like air in the air, or water in streams.

Leonardo da Vinci, deep mirror of darkness,
Where angels appear, their smiles charged with mystery
And tenderness, within the shadowy enclosures
Of pines and glaciers that shut in their country.

Rembrandt, tragic hospital re-echoing round a sigh;
A tall crucifix for only ornament
Traversed obliquely by a single wintry ray
Through which prayers rise, exhaling from excrement.

Michelangelo, no man's land where Hercules and Christ
Are at one; where powerful phantoms in crowds
Erect themselves deliberately in darkening twilights,
With pressed, rigid fingers ripping open their shrouds.

Rage of the wrestler, impudence of the faun;
Puget, the convicts' melancholy emperor,
Caging the lion's pride in a weak, jaundiced man,
Deducing beauty from crime, vice and terror.

Watteau, carnival where many a distinguished soul
Flutters like a moth, lost in the brilliance
Of chandeliers shedding frivolity on the cool,
Clear decors enclosing the changes of the dance.

Goya, nightmare compact of things incredible:
Foetuses being fried for a witch's sabbath feast;
An old woman at a mirror, a little naked girl
Lowering an artful stocking to tempt a devil's lust.

Delacroix, blood lake haunted by evil angels
In the permanent green darkness of a forest of firs,
Where under a stricken sky a muffled sigh fills
The air like a faintly echoed fanfare of Weber's.

Such, O Lord, are the maledictions, the tears,
The ecstasies, the blasphemies, the cries of Te Deum
Re-echoing along labyrinthine corridors:
A dream for mortal hearts distilled from divine opium,

The watchword reiterated by sentinels
A thousand times, the message whispered from post to post,
A beacon burning on a thousand citadels,
A call of all the hunters lost in the great forest.

For is this not indeed, O Lord, the best witness
That our dignity can render to Your pity,
This tide of tears which age after age gathers
To fail and fall on the shore of Your eternity?

Les Phares

Rubens, great river of oblivion,
garden of ease, cool flesh no lovers crave,
but where the floods of life unceasing run,
like wind on wind or wave on ocean wave;

Da Vinci -- deep and sombre looking-glass
enchanting angels haunt, with subtle smile
all mystery-charged, while shadows dark amass
and pines and ice-cliffs bound their prison-isle;

Rembrandt -- a piteous murmuring hospital
where ordure streams in tears and orisons,
stripped to the crucifix on one bare wall
illumed by one chill dart from wintry suns;

vast desert void, -- o Michael Angelo!
-- where TItans mix with Christs, and twilight clouds
where mighty spectres rise up stark and slow
-- whose opening fingers rend their mouldered shrouds;

the rage of boxers and the satyrs' lust
-- thou who hast found a grace in toiling knaves,
great heart, in a poor bilious body thrust
-- Puget, the gloomy king of galley-slaves;

Watteau -- bright carnival, where courtly pairs,
like butterflies in satin, flit about;
flaming in misty groves 'neath resin-flares
which pour their madness on the whirling rout;

Goya, who in a nightmare-horde unfurls
hags boiling foetuses in witches' milk,
beldames before the glass and naked girls
for demon-lovers tightening hose of silk;

and Delacroix -- dark lake of blood forlorn
'mid fadeless firs, where evil angels fare,
a sullen sky wherefrom a faery horn
floats, faint as Oberon's horn through muffling air;

these curses, blasphemies and these laments,
these ecstasies, cries, tears, hossanas from
a thousand caverns, form one echo, whence
-- death-doomed, we draw a heavenly opium!

theirs is a blast a thousand sentinels
pass on with their trumpets in a thousand moods;
a torch upon a thousand citadels,
a hail from hunters lost in pathless woods!

for truly, 'tis the mightiest voice our souls
command, o Lord, to prove their worth to Thee:
this ardent sob which down the ages rolls
and dies against Thy verge, Eternity!

The Beacons

RUBENS, oblivious garden of indolence,
Pillow of cool flesh where no man dreams of love,
Where life flows forth in troubled opulence,
As airs in heaven and seas in ocean move.

LEONARD DA VINCI, sombre and fathomless glass,
Where lovely angels with calm lips that smile,
Heavy with mystery, in the shadow pass,
Among the ice and pines that guard some isle.

REMBRANDT, sad hospital that a murmuring fills,
Where one tall crucifix hangs on the walls,
Where every tear-drowned prayer some woe distils,
And one cold, wintry ray obliquely falls.

Strong MICHELANGELO, a vague far place
Where mingle Christs with pagan Hercules;
Thin phantoms of the great through twilight pace,
And tear their Shroud with clenched hands void of ease.

The fighter's anger, the faun's impudence,
Thou makest of all these a lovely thing;
Proud heart, sick body, mind's magnificence:
PUGET, the convict's melancholy king.

WATTEAU, the carnival of illustrious hearts,
Fluttering like moths upon the wings of chance;
Bright lustres light the silk that flames and darts,
And pour down folly on the whirling dance.

GOYA, a nightmare full of things unknown;
The foetus witches broil on Sabbath night;
Old women at the mirror; children lone
Who tempt old demons with their limbs delight.

DELACROIX, lake of blood ill angels haunt,
Where ever-green, o'ershadowing woods arise;
Under the surly heaven strange fanfares chaunt
And pass, like one of Weber's strangled sighs.

And malediction, blasphemy and groan,
Ecstasies, cries, Te Deums, and tears of brine,
Are echoes through a thousand labyrinths flown;
For mortal hearts an opiate divine;

A shout cried by a thousand sentinels,
An order from a thousand bugles tossed,
A beacon o'er a thousand citadels,
A call to huntsmen in deep woodlands lost.

It is the mightiest witness that could rise
To prove our dignity, O Lord, to Thee;
This sob that rolls from age to age, and dies
Upon the verge of Thy Eternity!

The Sick Muse

My poor Muse, alas! what ails you today? 
Your hollow eyes are full of nocturnal visions; 
I see in turn reflected on your face 
Horror and madness, cold and taciturn.

Have the green succubus, the rosy elf,
Poured out for you love and fear from their urns?
Has the hand of Nightmare, cruel and despotic,
Plunged you to the bottom of some weird Minturnae?

I would that your bosom, fragrant with health,
Were constantly the dwelling place of noble thoughts,
And that your Christian blood would flow in rhythmic waves

Like the measured sounds of ancient verse, 
Over which reign in turn the father of all songs, 
Phoebus, and the great Pan, lord of harvest.

The Sick Muse

Alas, poor Muse, what ails you so today? 
Your hollow eyes with midnight visions burn, 
And turn about, in your complexion play 
Madness and horror, cold and taciturn.

Green succubus and rosy imp -- have they 
Poured you both fear and love into one glass? 
Or with his tyrant fist the nightmare, say, 
Submerged you in some fabulous morass?

I wish that, breathing health, your breast might nourish
Ever robuster thoughts therein to flourish:
And that your Christian blood, in rhythmic flow,

With those old polysyllables would chime, 
Where, turn about, reigned Phoebus, sire of rhyme, 
And Pan, the lord of harvests long ago.

The Sick Muse

Alas -- my poor Muse -- what aileth thee now? 
Thine eyes are bedimmed with the visions of Night, 
And silent and cold -- I perceive on thy brow 
In their turns -- Despair and Madness alight. 

A succubus green, or a hobgoblin red, 
Has it poured o'er thee Horror and Love from its urn?
Or the Nightmare with masterful bearing hath led 
Thee to drown in the depths of some magic Minturne? 

I wish, as the health-giving fragrance I cull, 
That thy breast with strong thoughts could for ever be full, 
And that rhymthmic'ly flowing -- thy Christian blood 

Could resemble the olden-time metrical-flood, 
Where each in his turn reigned the father of Rhymes 
Phoebus -- and Pan, lord of Harvest-times. 

La Muse malade

poor Muse, alas! what ails thee now? for thy
great hollow eyes with sights nocturnal burn, 
and in thy changing pallor I descry
madness and frozen horror, turn by turn.

did rosy sprites or pale green succubi
pour love or panic from their dream-filled urn?
did the mad fist of despot nightmare try
to drown thee where the fiends of hell sojourn?

I would that thou wert always filled with health
and manly thoughts undaunted; that a wealth
of Christian blood were thine, which always flowed

in calm broad rhythms like a Grecian ode,
now echoing forth Apollo's golden strain,
and now great Pan, the lord of ripening grain.

The Sick Muse

Poor Muse, alas, what ail's thee, then, to-day?
Thy hollow eyes with midnight visions burn,
Upon thy brow in alternation play,
Folly and Horror, cold and taciturn.

Have the green lemure and the goblin red,
Poured on thee love and terror from their urn?
Or with despotic hand the nightmare dread
Deep plunged thee in some fabulous Mintume?

Would that thy breast where so deep thoughts arise,
Breathed forth a healthful perfume with thy sighs;
Would that thy Christian blood ran wave by wave

In rhythmic sounds the antique numbers gave,
When Phoebus shared his alternating reign
With mighty Pan, lord of the ripening grain.

The Venal Muse

Muse of my heart, you who love palaces, 
When January frees his north winds, will you have, 
During the black ennui of snowy evenings, 
An ember to warm your two feet blue with cold?

Will you bring the warmth back to your mottled shoulders, 
With the nocturnal beams that pass through the shutters? 
Knowing that your purse is as dry as your palate, 
Will you harvest the gold of the blue, vaulted sky?

To earn your daily bread you are obliged
To swing the censer like an altar boy,
And to sing <i>Te Deums</i> in which you don't believe,

Or, hungry mountebank, to put up for sale your charm, 
Your laughter wet with tears which people do not see, 
To make the vulgar herd shake with laughter.

The Venal Muse

Muse of my heart, of palaces the lover, 
Where will you, when the blast of winter blows
In the black boredom of snowed lights, discover 
A glowing brand to warm your violet toes?

How will you there revive your marbled skin 
At the chill rays your shutters then disperse? 
The gold of azure heavens will you win 
When empty are your palate and your purse?

You'll need each evening, then, to earn your bread, 
As choirboys swinging censers that are dead 
Who sing Te Deums which they disbelieve:

Or, fasting pierrette, trade your loveliness 
And laughter, soaked in tears that none can guess, 
The boredom of the vulgar to relieve.

The Venal Muse

Lover of palaces, Muse of my heart, O sweet,
When hailstones fly from January's frosty sling,
On snowy nights amid black ennui, who shall bring
A cheery log to thaw your violet chill feet?
Shall you warm your wan mottled shoulder with the wing
Of bleak nocturnal beams that soar from the dank street?
Knowing you have no coin in purse nor bread to eat,
Shall you rake gold from blue arched skies for harvesting?

To earn your daily bread as the dense nights grow denser,
Shall you play acolyte and blithely swing your censer,
Chanting faithless Te Deums; or a moment after,
A famished mountebank, sell the charmed mysteries
Of laughter bathed in tears that no man ever sees
To rouse the rabble herd to fits of obscene laughter?

The Mercenary Muse

Muse of my heart, so fond of palaces, reply: 
When January sends those blizzards wild and white, 
Shall you have any fire at all to huddle by, 
Chafing your violet feet in the black snowy night?

Think: when the moon shines through the window, shall you try 
To thaw your marble shoulders in her square of light? 
Think: when your purse is empty and your palate dry, 
Can you from the starred heaven snatch all the gold in sight?

No, no; if you would earn your bread, you have no choice 
But to become a choir-boy, and chant in a loud voice 
Te Deums you have no faith in, and swing your censer high;

Or be a mountebank, employing all your art -- 
Yes, on an empty stomach and with an anguished heart -- 
To chase the boredom of the liverish gallery.

The Venal Muse

Oh Muse of my heart -- so fond of palaces old, 
Wilt have -- when New-Year speeds its wintry blast, 
Amid those tedious nights, with snow o'ercast, 
A log to warm thy feet, benumbed with cold? 

Wilt thou thy marbled shoulders then revive 
With nightly rays that through thy shutters peep? 
And -- void thy purse and void thy palace -- reap 
A golden hoard within some azure hive? 

Thou must, to earn thy daily bread, each night, 
Suspend the censer like an acolyte, 
Te-Deums sing, with sanctimonious ease, 

Or as a famished mountebank, with jokes obscene 
Essay to lull the vulgar rabble's spleen;
Thy laughter soaked in tears which no one sees. 

La Muse venale

o Muse I love, whom palaces delight,
when 'round thy door the blasts of winter cry,
wilt have, while snowy eves in boredom die,
one ember left for feet all freezing white?

wilt warm thy cold blue shoulders in the light
the stars impart through shutters left awry?
-- or climb, with hungry mouth and purse, the sky
to glean the gold from azure vaults of night?

thou must, to earn thy daily bread, employ
a well-swung censer, like a choir-boy,
and chant <i>Te Deum</i> from a heart unstirred,

or, starving clown, lay bare thy loveliness
and laugh through tears thou darest not confess,
to rouse the bilious humour of the herd.

The Venal Muse

Muse of my heart, lover of palaces,
When January comes with wind and sleet,
During the snowy eve's long wearinesses,
Will there be fire to warm thy violet feet?

Wilt thou reanimate thy marble shoulders
In the moon-beams that through the window fly?
Or when thy purse dries up, thy palace moulders,
Reap the far star-gold of the vaulted sky?

For thou, to keep thy body to thy soul,
Must swing a censer, wear a holy stole,
And chaunt Te Deums with unbelief between.

Or, like a starving mountebank, expose
Thy beauty and thy tear-drowned smile to those
Who wait thy jests to drive away thy spleen.

The Bad Monk

Cloisters in former times portrayed on their high walls 
The truths of Holy Writ with fitting pictures 
Which gladdened pious hearts and lessened the coldness, 
The austere appearance, of those monasteries.

In those days the sowing of Christ's Gospel flourished, 
And more than one famed monk, seldom quoted today, 
Taking his inspiration from the graveyard, 
Glorified Death with naive simplicity.

-- My soul is a tomb where, bad cenobite, 
I wander and dwell eternally; 
Nothing adorns the walls of that loathsome cloister.

O lazy monk! When shall I learn to make 
Of the living spectacle of my bleak misery 
The labor of my hands and the love of my eyes?

The Evil Monk

The walls of cloisters on their frescoed lath
Displayed, in pictures, sacred truths of old,
Whose sight would warm the entrails of one's faith
To temper their austerity and cold.

In times when every sowing flowered for Christ 
Lived famous monks, now out of memory's reach; 
The graveyard for their library sufficed, 
And Death was glorified in simple speech.

My soul's a grave, where, evil cenobite, 
To all eternity I have been banned. 
Nothing adorns this cloister full of spite.

O idle monk! Say, to what end were planned 
The living spectacle of my sad plight, 
Love of my eye, or labour of my hand?

The Evil Monk

The cloisters old, expounded on their walls 
With paintings, the Beatic Verity, 
The which -- ado'rning their religious halls, 
Enriched the frigidness of their Austerity. 

In days when Christian seeds bloomed o'er the land, 
Full many a noble monk unknown to-day, 
Upon the field of tombs would take his stand, 
Exalting Death in rude and simple way. 

My soul is a tomb where -- bad monk that I be --
I dwell and search its depths from all eternity, 
And nought bedecks the walls of the odious spot. 

Oh sluggard monk! when shall I glean aright 
From the living spectacle of my bitter lot, 
To mold my handy work and mine eyes' Delight? 

Le Mauvais Moine

the wide cold walls of cloisters, long ago
set forth God's Holy Truth for all to see,
and gazing friars there, with hearts aglow,
rejoiced despite their chill austerity.

then, when the seed of Christ would always grow,
illustrious monks, now lost to memory,
would choose the burial-plot for studio
to chant Death's glory, unaffectedly.

my soul's a tomb, which -- wretched friar! -- I
have paced since Time began, and occupy; 
bare-walled and hateful still my cloister stands.

o slothful monk! when shall I learn to find
in the stark drama of this living mind
joy for mine eyes and work to fit my hands?

The Evil Monk

The ancient cloisters on their lofty walls
Had holy Truth in painted frescoes shown,
And, seeing these, the pious in those halls
Felt their cold, lone austereness less alone.

At that time when Christ's seed flowered all around,
More than one monk, forgotten in his hour,
Taking for studio the burial-ground,
Glorified Death with simple faith and power.

And my soul is a sepulchre where I,
Ill cenobite, have spent eternity:
On the vile cloister walls no pictures rise.

O when may I cast off this weariness,
And make the pageant of my old distress
For these hands labour, pleasure for these eyes?

The Enemy

My youth has been nothing but a tenebrous storm, 
Pierced now and then by rays of brilliant sunshine; 
Thunder and rain have wrought so much havoc 
That very few ripe fruits remain in my garden.

I have already reached the autumn of the mind, 
And I must set to work with the spade and the rake 
To gather back the inundated soil 
In which the rain digs holes as big as graves.

And who knows whether the new flowers I dream of 
Will find in this earth washed bare like the strand, 
The mystic aliment that would give them vigor?

Alas! Alas! Time eats away our lives, 
And the hidden Enemy who gnaws at our hearts 
Grows by drawing strength from the blood we lose!

The Enemy

My youth was but a tempest, dark and savage, 
Through which, at times, a dazzling sun would shoot 
The thunder and the rain have made such ravage 
My garden is nigh bare of rosy fruit.

Now I have reached the Autumn of my thought, 
And spade and rake must toil the land to save, 
That fragments of my flooded fields be sought 
From where the water sluices out a grave.

Who knows if the new flowers my dreams prefigure, 
In this washed soil should find, as by a sluit, 
The mystic nourishment to give them vigour?

Time swallows up our life, O ruthless rigour!
And the dark foe that nibbles our heart's root, 
Grows on our blood the stronger and the bigger!

The Enemy

My youth was a dark storm,
Crossed here and there by brilliant suns;
Thunder and rain have caused such quick ravage
That there remain in my garden very few red fruits.

Now I have touched the autumn of my mind,
And I must use the spade and rakes
To assemble again the drenched lands,
Where the water digs holes as large as graves.

And who knows whether the new flowers I dream of
Will find in this soil washed like a shore
The mystic food which would create their strength?

-- О grief! О grief! Time eats away life,
And the dark Enemy who gnaws the heart
Grows and thrives on the blood we lose.

The Ruined Garden

My childhood was only a menacing shower,
cut now and ten by hours of brilliant heat.
All the top soil was killed by rain and sleet,
my garden hardly bore a standing flower.

From now on, my mind's autumn! I must take
the field and dress my beds with spade and rake
and restore order to my flooded grounds.
There the rain raised mountains like burial mounds.

I throw fresh seeds out. Who knows what survives?
What elements will give us life and food?
This soil is irrigated by the tides.

Time and nature sluice away our lives.
A virus eats the heart out of our sides,
digs in and multiplies on our lost blood.

The Enemy

I think of my gone youth as of a stormy sky 
Infrequently transpierced by a benignant sun; 
Tempest and hail have done their work; and what have I? -- 
How many fruits in my torn garden? -- scarcely one.

And now that I approach the autumn of my mind, 
And must reclaim once more the inundated earth -- 
Washed into stony trenches deep as graves I find 
I wield the rake and hoe, asking, "What is it worth?"

Who can assure me, these new flowers for which I toil 
Will find in the disturbed and reconstructed soil 
That mystic aliment on which alone they thrive?

Oh, anguish, anguish! Time eats up all things alive; 
And that unseen, dark Enemy, upon the spilled 
Bright blood we could not spare, battens, and is fulfilled.

The Enemy

My childhood was nought but a ravaging storm, 
Enlivened at times by a brilliant sun;
The rain and the winds wrought such havoc and harm 
That of buds on my plot there remains hardly one. 

Behold now the Fall of ideas I have reached, 
And the shovel and rake one must therefore resume, 
In collecting the turf, inundated and breached, 
Where the waters dug trenches as deep as a tomb. 

And yet these new blossoms, for which I craved, 
Will they find in this earth -- like a shore that is laved --
The mystical fuel which vigour imparts? 

Oh misery! -- Time devours our lives, 
And the enemy black, which consumeth our hearts 
On the blood of our bodies, increases and thrives! 

L'Ennemi

my youth was all a murky hurricane;
not oft did the suns of splendour burst the gloom;
so wild the lightning raged, so fierce the rain,
few crimson fruits my garden-close illume.

now I have touched the autumn of the mind,
I must repair and smooth the earth, to save
my little seed-plot, torn and undermined,
guttered and gaping like an open grave.

and will the flowers all my dreams implore
draw from this garden wasted like a shore
some rich mysterious power the storm imparts?

-- o grief! o grief! time eats away our lives,
and the dark Enemy gnawing at our hearts
sucks from our blood the strength whereon he thrives!

Evil Fate

To lift a weight so heavy, 
Would take your courage, Sisyphus!
Although one's heart is in the work, 
Art is long and Time is short.

Far from famous sepulchers 
Toward a lonely cemetery 
My heart, like muffled drums, 
Goes beating funeral marches.

Many a jewel lies buried 
In darkness and oblivion, 
Far, far away from picks and drills;

Many a flower regretfully 
Exhales perfume soft as secrets 
In a profound solitude.

III Luck

So huge a burden to support 
Your courage, Sisyphus, would ask; 
Well though my heart attacks its task, 
Yet Art is long and Time is short.

Far from the famed memorial arch 
Towards a lonely grave I come. 
My heart in its funereal march 
Goes beating like a muffled drum.

-- Yet many a gem lies hidden still 
Of whom no pick-axe, spade, or drill 
The lonely secrecy invades;

And many a flower, to heal regret, 
Pours forth its fragrant secret yet 
Amidst the solitary shades.

Ill-Starred

A man would needs be brave and strong
As Sisyphus, for such a task! 
It is not greater zeal I ask -- 
But life is brief, and art is long.

To a forsaken mound of clay 
Where no admirers ever come, 
My heart, like an invisible drum, 
Goes beating a dead march all day.

Many a jewel of untold worth 
Lies slumbering at the core of earth, 
In darkness and oblivion drowned;

Many a flower has bloomed and spent 
The secret of its passionate scent 
Upon the wilderness profound.

Ill Luck

To bear so vast a load of grief
Thy courage, Sisyphus, I crave!
My heart against the task is brave,
But Art is long and Time is brief.

For from Fame's proud sepulchral arches,
Towards a graveyard lone and dumb,
My sad heart, like a muffled drum,
Goes beating slow funereal marches.

 -- Full many a shrouded jewel sleeps
In dark oblivion, lost in deeps
Unknown to pick or plummet's sound:

Full many a weeping blossom flings
Her perfume, sweet as secret things,
In silent solitudes profound.

Ill-Luck

O Sisyphus, thy strength were meet 
A load so heavy to sustain; 
The soul for work is very fain, 
But Art is long, and Time is fleet. 

Towards a lonely cemetery 
From all famed sepulchres apart. 
Like to a muffled drum my heart 
Beats funeral marches ceaselessly. 

Jewels many and many a one 
Lie hid in dark oblivion 
Far, far from pick or plummet's ken; 

Many sweet flowers' scented breath 
Is lavished till they fade in death 
In solitudes untrod by men. 

My Former Life

For a long time I dwelt under vast porticos 
Which the ocean suns lit with a thousand colors, 
The pillars of which, tall, straight, and majestic, 
Made them, in the evening, like basaltic grottos.

The billows which cradled the image of the sky 
Mingled, in a solemn, mystical way, 
The omnipotent chords of their rich harmonies 
With the sunsets' colors reflected in my eyes;

It was there that I lived in voluptuous calm,
In splendor, between the azure and the sea,
And I was attended by slaves, naked, perfumed,

Who fanned my brow with fronds of palms 
And whose sole task it was to fathom 
The dolorous secret that made me pine away.

Former Life

I've lived beneath huge portals where marine 
Suns coloured, with a myriad fires, the waves; 
At eve majestic pillars made the scene 
Resemble those of vast basaltic caves.

The breakers, rolling the reflected skies, 
Mixed, in a solemn, enigmatic way, 
The powerful symphonies they seem to play 
With colours of the sunset in my eyes.

There did I live in a voluptuous calm
Where breezes, waves, and splendours roved as vagrants; 
And naked slaves, impregnated with fragrance,

Would fan my forehead with their fronds of palm: 
Their only charge was to increase the anguish 
Of secret grief in which I loved to languish.

My Former Life

I can remember a country of long, high colonnades 
Which mirrored in their pale marble the prismatic light 
Cast from the bright sea billows in a thousand shades, 
And which resembled a cave of fluted basalt by night.

The ocean, strewn with sliding images of the sky, 
Would mingle in a mysterious and solemn way, 
Under the wild brief sunsets, its tremendous cry 
With the reflected colors of the ruined day.

There did I dwell in quiet luxury apart,
Amid the slowly changing hues of clouds and waves; 
And there I was attended by two naked slaves

Who sometimes fanned me with great fronds on either side, 
And whose sole task was to let sink into my heart 
The dolorous and beautiful secret of which I died.

La Vie anterieure

aeons I dwelt beneath vast porticoes
stained by the sun and sea with fiery dye,
whose lordly pillars, stark against the sky,
like caverned cliffs in evening's gold arose.

the rolling surges and their mirror skies
blent in a grave mysterious organ-air
the chords all-powerful of their music rare
with sunset's colours in my glowing eyes.

'twas there I lived before, 'mid azure waves,
blue skies and splendours, in voluptuous calm,
while, steeped in every fragrance, naked slaves

made cool my brow with waving fronds of palm:
-- their only care to drive the secret dart
of my dull sorrow, deeper in my heart.

A Former Life

Long since, I lived beneath vast porticoes,
By many ocean-sunsets tinged and fired,
Where mighty pillars, in majestic rows,
Seemed like basaltic caves when day expired.

The rolling surge that mirrored all the skies
Mingled its music, turbulent and rich,
Solemn and mystic, with the colours which
The setting sun reflected in my eyes.

And there I lived amid voluptuous calms,
In splendours of blue sky and wandering wave,
Tended by many a naked, perfumed slave,

Who fanned my languid brow with waving palms.
They were my slaves -- the only care they had
To know what secret grief had made me sad.

Previous Existence

For a long time I lived under vast colonnades, 
Stained with a thousand fires by ocean suns, 
Whose vast pillars, straight and majestic, 
Made them seem in the evening like grottos of basalt.

The sea-swells, in swaying the pictures of the skies, 
Mingled solemnly and mystically 
The all-powerful harmonies of their rich music 
With the colors of the setting sun reflected by my eyes.

It is there that I have lived in calm voluptuousness,
In the center of the blue, amidst the waves and splendors
And the nude slaves, heavy with perfumes,

Who refreshed my forehead with palm-leaves, 
Their only care was to fathom 
The dolorous secret that made me languish.

Gypsies Traveling

The prophetical tribe, that ardent eyed people, 
Set out last night, carrying their children 
On their backs, or yielding to those fierce appetites 
The ever ready treasure of pendulous breasts.

The men travel on foot with their gleaming weapons 
Alongside the wagons where their kin are huddled, 
Surveying the heavens with eyes rendered heavy 
By a mournful regret for vanished illusions.

The cricket from the depths of his sandy retreat 
Watches them as they pass, and louder grows his song; 
Cybele, who loves them, increases her verdure,

Makes the desert blossom, water spurt from the rock 
Before these travelers for whom is opened wide 
The familiar domain of the future's darkness.

Gipsies on the Road

The tribe of seers, last night, began its march 
With burning eyes, and shouldering its young 
To whose ferocious appetites it swung 
The wealth of hanging breasts that nought can parch.

The men, their weapons glinting in the rays, 
Walk by the convoy where their folks are carted, 
Sweeping the far-off skylines with a gaze 
Regretful of Chimeras long-departed.

Out of his hole the cricket sees them pass
And sings the louder. Greener grows the grass
Because Cybele loves them, and has made

The barren rock to gush, the sands to flower, 
To greet these travellers, before whose power 
Familiar futures open realms of shade.

The Gypsies

They set out yesterday, the tribe of ragged seers 
With burning eyes -- bearing their little ones in nests 
Upon their backs, or giving them, to stop their tears, 
The teats of inexhaustible and swarthy breasts.

The men walk shouldering their rifles silently 
Beside the hooded wagons with bright tatters hung, 
And peer into the sky, as if they hoped to see 
Some old mirage that beckoned them when they were young.

No matter where they journey through the meager land, 
The cricket will sing louder from his lair of sand, 
And Cybele, who loves them, will smile where they advance:

The desert will be fruitful, the arid rock will flow 
Before the footsteps of these wayfarers, who go 
Eternally into the lightless realm of chance.

Gypsies Travelling

The tribe prophetic with the eyes of fire
Went forth last night; their little ones at rest
Each on his mother's back, with his desire
Set on the ready treasure of her breast.

Laden with shining arms the men-folk tread
By the long wagons where their goods lie hidden;
They watch the heaven with eyes grown weariëd
Of hopeless dreams that come to them unbidden.

The grasshopper, from out his sandy screen,
Watching them pass redoubles his shrill song;
Dian, who loves them, makes the grass more green,

And makes the rock run water for this throng
Of ever-wandering ones Whose calm eyes see
Familiar realms of darkness yet to be.

Man and the Sea

Free man, you will always cherish the sea! 
The sea is your mirror; you contemplate your soul 
In the infinite unrolling of its billows; 
Your mind is an abyss that is no less bitter.

You like to plunge into the bosom of your image; 
You embrace it with eyes and arms, and your heart 
Is distracted at times from its own clamoring 
By the sound of this plaint, wild and untamable.

Both of you are gloomy and reticent:
Man, no one has sounded the depths of your being;
O Sea, no person knows your most hidden riches,
So zealously do you keep your secrets!

Yet for countless ages you have fought each other
Without pity, without remorse,
So fiercely do you love carnage and death,
O eternal fighters, implacable brothers!

Man and the Sea

Free man, you'll always love the sea -- for this, 
That it's a mirror, where you see your soul 
In its eternal waves that chafe and roll; 
Nor is your soul less bitter an abyss.

in your reflected image there to merge, 
You love to dive, its eyes and limbs to match. 
Sometimes your heart forgets its own, to catch 
The rhythm of that wild and tameless dirge.

The two of you are shadowy, deep, and wide. 
Man! None has ever plummeted your floor -- 
Sea! None has ever known what wealth you store -- 
Both are so jealous of the things you hide!

Yet age on age is ended, or begins,
While you without remorse or pity fight.
So much in death and carnage you delight,
Eternal wrestlers! Unrelenting twins!

Man and the Sea

Free man, you shall forever cherish the vast sea,
The sea, that image where you contemplate your soul
As everlastingly its mighty waves unroll.
Your mind a yawning gulf seasoned as bitterly.

You love to plunge into your image to the core,
Embracing it with eyes and arms; your very heart
Sometimes finds a distraction from its urgent smart 
In the wild sea's untamable and plaintive roar.

Both of you live in darkness and in mystery:
Man, who has ever plumbed the far depths of your being?
O Sea, who knows your private hidden riches, seeing
How strange the secrets you preserve so jealously?

And yet for countless ages you have fought each other 
With hands unsparing and with unforbearing breath, 
Each an eternal foe to his relentless brother, 
So avid are you both of slaughter and of death.

Man and the Sea

Free man! the sea is to thee ever dear! 
The sea is thy mirror, thou regardest thy soul 
In its mighteous waves that unendingly roll, 
And thy spirit is yet not a chasm less drear. 

Thou delight'st to plunge deep in thine image down;
Thou tak'st it with eyes and with arms in embrace, 
And at times thine own inward voice would'st efface 
With the sound of its savage ungovernable moan. 

You are both of you, sombre, secretive and deep: 
Oh mortal, thy depths are foraye unexplored, 
Oh sea -- no one knoweth thy dazzling hoard, 
You both are so jealous your secrets to keep! 

And endless ages have wandered by, 
Yet still without pity or mercy you fight, 
So mighty in plunder and death your delight:
Oh wrestlers! so constant in enmity! 

L'Homme et la mer

love Ocean always, Man: ye both are free!
the Sea, thy mirror: thou canst find thy soul
in the unfurling billows' surging roll,
thy mind's abyss is bitter as the sea.

thou doest rejoice thy mirrored face to pierce, 
plunging, and clasp with eyes and arms; thy heart
at its own mutter oft forgets to start,
lulled by that plaint indomitably fierce.

discreet ye both are; both are taciturn:
Man, none has measured all thy dark abyss,
none, Sea, knows where thy hoarded treasure is, 
so jealously your secrets ye inurn!

and yet for countless ages, trucelessly,
-- o ruthless warriors! -- ye have fought and striven:
brothers by lust for death and carnage driven,
twin wrestlers, gripped for all eternity!

Don Juan in Hades

When Don Juan descended to the underground sea, 
And when he had given his obolus to Charon, 
That gloomy mendicant, with Antisthenes' proud look, 
Seized the two oars with strong, revengeful hands.

Showing their pendent breasts and their unfastened gowns 
Women writhed and twisted under the black heavens, 
And like a great flock of sacrificial victims, 
A continuous groan trailed along in the wake.

Sganarelle with a laugh was demanding his wage, 
While Don Luis with a trembling finger 
Was showing to the dead, wandering along the shores, 
The impudent son who had mocked his white brow.

Shuddering in her grief, Elvira, chaste and thin, 
Near her treacherous spouse who was once her lover, 
Seemed to implore of him a final, parting smile 
That would shine with the sweetness of his first promises.

Erect in his armor, a tall man carved from stone 
Was standing at the helm and cutting the black flood; 
But the hero unmoved, leaning on his rapier, 
Kept gazing at the wake and deigned not look aside.

Don Juan in Hell

When, having reached the subterranean wave, 
Don Juan paid his passage from the shore, 
Proud as Antisthenes, a surly knave 
With vengeful arms laid hold of either oar.

With hanging breasts between their mantles showing 
Sad women, writhing under the black sky, 
Made, as they went, the sound of cattle lowing 
As from a votive herd that's led to die.

Sganarelle for his wages seemed to linger, 
And laughed; while to the dead assembled there, 
Don Luis pointed out with trembling finger 
The son who dared to flout his silver hair.

Chilled in her crepe, the chaste and thin Elvira, 
Standing up close to her perfidious spouse, 
Seemed to be pleading from her old admirer 
For that which thrilled his first, unbroken vows.

A great stone man in armour leaped aboard; 
Seizing the helm, the coal-black wave he cleft. 
But the calm hero, leaning on his sword, 
Had eyes for nothing but the wake they left.

Don Juan in Hades

He found the wide bark rocking in the Stygian breeze 
And came aboard, having first paid Charon what he owed. 
A beggar, somber and haughty as Antisthenes, 
Seized the long oars with a revengeful gesture and rowed.

Writhing and tearing open their garments while he crossed, 
A crowd of disappointed females, herded there 
Along the bank like victims for a holocaust, 
Filled with a soft and bestial moaning the dark air.

Sganarelle laughed triumphantly, demanding his wage; 
Don Luis, still wrathful, pointed with a palsied hand 
To the unruly son who mocked him in his old age, 
Calling to witness the dead throngs upon that strand.

She whom he wed in church and loved a little while, 
Elvira, thin and trembling in her black robes of grief, 
Seemed to implore of her betrayer a last smile 
In memory of his first ardor, noble and brief.

The knight he murdered and whose ghost he had rebuked 
Stood now, a tall and cuirassed helmsman, at the stem; 
But the calm hero, leaning upon his rapier, looked 
Absently into the water, ignoring all of them.

Don Juan In Hell

The night Don Juan came to pay his fees
To Charon, by the caverned water's shore,
A Beggar, proud-eyed as Antisthenes,
Stretched out his knotted fingers on the oar.

Mournful, with drooping breasts and robes unsewn
The shapes of women swayed in ebon skies,
Trailing behind him with a restless moan
Like cattle herded for a sacrifice.

Here, grinning for his wage, stood Sganarelle,
And here Don Luis pointed, bent and dim,
To show the dead who lined the holes of Hell,
This was that impious son who mocked at him.

The hollow-eyed, the chaste Elvira came,
Trembling and veiled, to view her traitor spouse.
Was it one last bright smile she thought to claim,
Such as made sweet the morning of his vows?

A great stone man rose like a tower on board,
Stood at the helm and cleft the flood profound:
But the calm hero, leaning on his sword,
Gazed back, and would not offer one look round.


Don Juan in Hades

When the hidalgo reached the subterranean seas,
And, with an obol, paid Charon's accustomed score,
A gloomy beggarman, proud as Antisthenes,
With strong revengeful hands seized either trailing oar.

With sagging breasts and gray unfastened gowns, a crowd
Of women writhed in woe under a leaden sky,
In their grim wake a groan trailed, mournfully and loud,
Like flocks of sacrificial victims trudging by.

Sganarelle, grinning, claimed his wages; dour and lank,
Don Luis, with trembling finger, pointed at the prow,
To show the phantoms wandering on the river bank
That impious son who mocked his father's snow-white brow.

Elvira, chaste and gaunt, shuddered in sorrow, while
Beside her traitorous spouse (her lover, once) she seemed
To crave the favor of an ultimate bright smile,
Sweet as his first-made vows and as the dream she dreamed.

Erect in coat-of-mail, a tall man, hewn of stone,
Stood at the helm, cleaving the flood. But in mute pride,
Leaning upon his sword, impassive and alone,
The hero watched the wave nor deigned to look aside.

Don Juan in Hades

When Juan sought the subterranean flood,
And paid his obolus on the Stygian shore,
Charon, the proud and sombre beggar, stood
With one strong, vengeful hand on either oar.

With open robes and bodies agonised,
Lost women writhed beneath that darkling sky;
There were sounds as of victims sacrificed:
Behind him all the dark was one long cry.

And Sganarelle, with laughter, claimed his pledge;
Don Luis, with trembling finger in the air,
Showed to the souls who wandered in the sedge
The evil son who scorned his hoary hair.

Shivering with woe, chaste Elvira the while,
Near him untrue to all but her till now,
Seemed to beseech him for one farewell smile
Lit with the sweetness of the first soft vow.

And clad in armour, a tall man of stone
Held firm the helm, and clove the gloomy flood;
But, staring at the vessel's track alone,
Bent on his sword the unmoved hero stood.

Punishment for Pride

In that marvelous time in which Theology
Flourished with the greatest energy and vigor,
It is said that one day a most learned doctor
-- After winning by force the indifferent hearts,
Having stirred them in the dark depths of their being;
After crossing on the way to celestial glory,
Singular and strange roads, even to him unknown,
Which only pure Spirits, perhaps, had reached, -- 
Panic-stricken, like one who has clambered too high,
He cried, carried away by a satanic pride:
"Jesus, little jesus! I raised you very high!
But had I wished to attack you through the defect
In your armor, your shame would equal your glory,
And you would be no more than a despised fetus!"

At that very moment his reason departed. 
A crape of mourning veiled the brilliance of that sun; 
Complete chaos rolled in and filled that intellect, 
A temple once alive, ordered and opulent, 
Within whose walls so much pomp had glittered. 
Silence and darkness took possession of it 
Like a cellar to which the key is lost.

Henceforth he was like the beasts in the street, 
And when he went along, seeing nothing, across 
The fields, distinguishing nor summer nor winter, 
Dirty, useless, ugly, like a discarded thing, 
He was the laughing-stock, the joke, of the children.

The Punishment of Pride

When first Theology in her young prime 
Flourished with vigour, in that wondrous time, 
Of an illustrious Doctor it was said 
That, having forced indifferent hearts to shed 
Tears of emotion, moved to depths profound: 
And having to celestial glory found 
Marvellous paths, to his own self unknown, 
Where only purest souls had fared alone -- 
Like a man raised too high, as in a panic, 
Crazed with a vertigo of pride satanic, 
He cried "Poor Christ, I've raised you to renown!
But had I wished to bring you crashing down 
Probing your flaws, your shame would match your pride 
And you'd be but a foetus to deride!"

Immediately he felt his wits escape, 
That flash of sunlight veiled itself in crepe. 
All chaos through his intellect was rolled, 
A temple once, containing hoards of gold, 
By opulence and order well controlled, 
And topped with ceilings splendid to behold. 
Silence and night installed their reign in him. 
It seemed he was a cellar dank and dim, 
To which no living man could find the key; 
And from that day a very beast was he. 
And while he wandered senseless on his way, 
Not knowing spring from summer, night from day, 
Foul, dirty, useless, and with no hereafter, 
He served the children as a butt for laughter.

The Punishment of Pride

Once in that marvelous and unremembered time
When theologic thought was flowering at its prime,
A pious metaphysician, the pundit of his day,
He who could move the hearts of murderers, so they say,
Having attained to a most fearful pitch of grace
By curious pathways he himself could scarcely trace,
For all his subtlety of logic -- this austere
And venerable person (like one who climbs a sheer
Peak unperturbed, but at the top grows dizzy) cried,
Suddenly overtaken with satanic pride:
"Jesus, my little Jesus! I have exalted you
Into a very Titan -- yet wielding as I do
The wand of dialectic, I could have made you shrink
To fetus-like proportions and fade away, I think!"

He thought no more, for instantly his reason cracked. 
The noontide of this great intelligence was blacked 
Out. Elemental chaos rolled through this serene 
Temple, where so much order and opulence had been. 
From its gold floor to its groined ceiling it grew dim: 
Silence and utter night installed themselves in him, 
As in an antique dungeon whereof the key is lost.
And from that day, through rain and snow, through sleet and frost, 
Not knowing spring from winter and too mad to care, 
He roamed about gesticulating, with the air 
Of an old suit of underclothes hung out to dry, 
And made the children laugh whenever he went by.

The Chastisement of Pride

In those old times wherein Theology 
Flourished with greater sap and energy, 
A celebrated doctor -- so they say -- 
Having stirred many careless hearts one day 
Down to their dullest depths, and having shown 
Strange pathways leading to the heavenly throne -- 
Tracks he himself had never journeyed on 
(Whereby maybe pure spirits alone had gone) -- 
Frenzied and swollen by a devilish pride, 
Like to a man who has climbed too high, outcried: 
"Ah, little Jesus, I have lifted thee! 
But had I willed to assault thy dignity, 
Thy shame had matched thy present fame, and lo! 
Thou wouldst be but a wretched embryo!"

Straightway his reason left him; that keen mind, 
Sunbright before, was darkened and made blind; 
All chaos whirled within that intellect 
Erewhile a shrine with all fair gems bedeckt. 
Beneath whose roof such pomp had shone so bright; 
He was possessed by silence and thick night 
As is a cellar when its key is lost 

Thenceforth he was a brute beast; when he crossed 
The fields at times, not seeing any thing. 
Knowing not if 'twere winter or green spring, 
Useless, repulsive, vile, he made a mock 
For infants, a mere children's laughing-stock. 

Beauty

I am fair, O mortals! like a dream carved in stone, 
And my breast where each one in turn has bruised himself 
Is made to inspire in the poet a love 
As eternal and silent as matter.

On a throne in the sky, a mysterious sphinx, 
I join a heart of snow to the whiteness of swans; 
I hate movement for it displaces lines, 
And never do I weep and never do I laugh.

Poets, before my grandiose poses, 
Which I seem to assume from the proudest statues, 
Will consume their lives in austere study;

For I have, to enchant those submissive lovers,
Pure mirrors that make all things more beautiful:
My eyes, my large, wide eyes of eternal brightness!

Beauty

I'm fair, O mortals, as a dream of stone; 
My breasts whereon, in turn, your wrecks you shatter,
Were made to wake in poets' hearts alone 
A love as indestructible as matter.

A sky-throned sphinx, unknown yet, I combine 
The cygnet's whiteness with a heart of snow. 
I loathe all movement that displaces line, 
And neither tears nor laughter do I know.

Poets before my postures, which I seem 
To learn from masterpieces, love to dream 
And there in austere thought consume their days.

I have, these docile lovers to subject, 
Mirrors that glorify all they reflect -- 
These eyes, great eyes, eternal in their blaze!

Beauty

My face is a marmoreal dream, O mortals!
And on my breast all men are bruised in turn,
So moulded that the poet's love may burn
Mute and eternal as the earth's cold portals.

Throned like a Sphinx unveiled in the blue deep,
A heart of snow my swan-white beauty muffles;
I hate the line that undulates and ruffles:
And never do I laugh and never weep.

The poets, prone beneath my presence towering
With stately port of proudest obelisks,
Worship with rites austere, their days devouring;

For I have charms to keep their love, pure disks
That make all things more beautiful and tender:
My large eyes, radiant with eternal splendour!

Beauty

I arn lovely, O mortals, like a dream of stone, 
And my bosom, where each one gets bruised in turn, 
To inspire the love of a poet is prone, 
Like matter eternally silent and stern. 

As an unfathomed sphinx, enthroned by the Nile, 
My heart a swan's whiteness with granite combines, 
And I hate every movement, displacing the lines, 
And never I weep and never I smile. 

The poets in front of mine attitudes fine 
(Which the proudest of monuments seem to implant), 
To studies profound all their moments assign, 

For I have all these docile swains to enchant --
Two mirrors, which Beauty in all things ignite: 
Mine eyes, my large eyes, of eternal Light! 

La Beaute

fair as a dream in stone I loom afar
-- mortals! -- with dazzling breast where, bruised in turn
all poets fall in silence, doomed to burn
with love eternal as the atoms are.

white as a swan I throne with heart of snow
in azure space, a sphynx that none divine,
no hateful motion mars my lovely line,
nor tears nor laughter shall I ever know.

and poets, lured by this magnificence
-- this grandeur proud as Parian monuments --
toil all their days like martyrs in a spell;

lovers bewitched are they, for I possess
pure mirrors harbouring worlds of loveliness:
my wide, wide eyes where fires eternal dwell!

The Ideal

It will never be the beauties that vignettes show, 
Those damaged products of a good-for-nothing age, 
Their feet shod with high shoes, hands holding castanets, 
Who can ever satisfy any heart like mine.

I leave to Gavarni, poet of chlorosis, 
His prattling troop of consumptive beauties, 
For I cannot find among those pale roses 
A flower that is like my red ideal.

The real need of my heart, profound as an abyss, 
Is you, Lady Macbeth, soul so potent in crime, 
The dream of Aeschylus, born in the land of storms;

Or you, great Night, daughter of Michelangelo, 
Who calmly contort, reclining in a strange pose 
Your charms molded by the mouths of Titans!

The Ideal

It's not with smirking beauties of vignettes, 
The shopsoiled products of a worthless age, 
With buskined feet and hands for castanets -- 
A heart like mine its longing could assuage.

I leave Gavarni, poet of chloroses, 
His twittering flock, anaemic and unreal. 
I could not find among such bloodless roses, 
A flower to match my crimson-hued ideal.

To this heart deeper than the deepest canyon,
Lady Macbeth would be a fit companion,
Crime-puissant dream of Aeschylus; or you,

Daughter of Buonarroti, stately Night!
Whose charms to suit a Titan's appetite,
You twist, so strange, yet peaceful, to the view.

The Ideal

No beauties such as figure in vignettes, 
Monsters of a vain era's lame design, 
With feet for buskins, hands for castanets, 
Can ever satisfy a heart like mine. 
I leave to Gavarni's chlorotic Muse 
These sickly prattling nymphs, however real; 
Not one of these pale roses would I choose 
To match the flowers of my red ideal.

What my heart, deep as an abyss, demands, 
Lady Macbeth, is your brave bloody hands, 
And, Aeschylus, your dreams of rage and fright, 
Or you, vast Night, daughter of Angelo's, 
Who peacefully twist into a strange pose 
Charms fashioned for a Titan's mouth to bite.

Ideal Love

No, never can these frail ephemeral creatures,
The withered offspring of a worthless age,
These buskined limbs, these false and painted features,
The hunger of a heart like mine assuage.

Leave to the laureate of sickly posies
Gavami's hospital sylphs, a simpering choir!
Vainly I seek among those pallid roses
One blossom that allures my red desire.

Thou with my soul's abysmal dreams be blended,
Lady Macbeth, in crime superb and splendid,
A dream of Aeschylus flowered in cold eclipse

Of Northern suns! Thou, Night, inspire my passion,
Calm child of Angelo, coiling in strange fashion
Thy large limbs moulded for a Titan's lips!

The Ideal

It could ne'er be those beauties of ivory vignettes;
The varied display of a worthless age, 
Nor puppet-like figures with castonets, 
That ever an heart like mine could engage. 

I leave to Gavarni, that poet of chlorosis, 
His hospital-beauties in troups that whirl, 
For I cannot discover amid his pale roses 
A flower to resemble my scarlet ideal. 

Since, what for this fathomless heart I require 
Is -- Lady Macbeth you! in crime so dire;
-- An Aeschylus dream transposed from the South --

Or thee, oh great "Night"of Michael-Angelo born, 
Who so calmly thy limbs in strange posture hath drawn, 
Whose allurements are framed for a Titan's mouth. 

L'Ideal

'twill be no lovely girls of our vignettes
-- spoiled fruits our worthless epoch deems divine --
slim slippered feet, hands made for castagnettes,
that shall content this questing heart of mine.

I leave to great Gavarni, bard of blight,
his prattling beauties with their frail appeal.
I cannot find among his roses white
the flaming flower of my red ideal.

I crave, to fill my heart's abyss of death,
thy passion, fair and merciless Macbeth, 
whom Aeschylus might not have dreamed in boreal snows;

or thine, great Night, in Bunarroti's South,
tranquilly turning in a monstrous pose
thy bosom fashioned by a Titan's mouth!

The Giantess

At the time when Nature with a lusty spirit 
Was conceiving monstrous children each day, 
I should have liked to live near a young giantess, 
Like a voluptuous cat at the feet of a queen.

I should have liked to see her soul and body thrive 
And grow without restraint in her terrible games; 
To divine by the mist swimming within her eyes 
If her heart harbored a smoldering flame;

To explore leisurely her magnificent form;
To crawl upon the slopes of her enormous knees,
And sometimes in summer, when the unhealthy sun

Makes her stretch out, weary, across the countryside, 
To sleep nonchalantly in the shade of her breasts, 
Like a peaceful hamlet below a mountainside.

The Giantess

Of old when Nature, in her verve defiant, 
Conceived each day some birth of monstrous mien,
I would have lived near some young female giant 
Like a voluptuous cat beside a queen;

To see her body flowering with her soul 
Freely develop in her mighty games, 
And in the mists that through her gaze would roll 
Guess that her heart was hatching sombre flames;

To roam her mighty contours as I please, 
Ramp on the cliff of her tremendous knees, 
And in the solstice, when the suns that kill

Make her stretch out across the land and rest, 
To sleep beneath the shadow of her breast 
Like a hushed village underneath a hill.

The Giantess

In times of old when Nature in her glad excess 
Brought forth such living marvels as no more are seen, 
I should have loved to dwell with a young giantess, 
Like a voluptuous cat about the feet of a queen;

To run and laugh beside her in her terrible games, 
And see her grow each day to a more fearful size, 
And see the flowering of her soul, and the first flames 
Of passionate longing in the misty depths of her eyes;

To scale the slopes of her huge knees, explore at will
The hollows and the heights of her -- and when, oppressed
By the long afternoons of summer, cloudless and still,

She would stretch out across the countryside to rest, 
I should have loved to sleep in the shadow of her breast, 
Quietly as a village nestling under a hill.

The Giantess

In times when Nature, lusty to excess, 
Bred monstrous children, would that I had been 
Living beside a youthful giantess, 
Like a voluptuous cat beside a queen; 
To see her soul and body gain full size 
Blossoming freely in her fearsome games, 
And by the damp mists swimming in her eyes 
To watch her heart nursing what somber flames!

To roam her mighty form at my sweet ease,
To crawl along the slopes of her vast knees,
And, summers, when the sun's unhealthy heats
Made her sprawl, tired, across the countryside
To sleep at leisure, shaded by her teats,
Like a calm hamlet by the mountainside.

The Giantess

I should have loved -- erewhile when Heaven conceived 
Each day, some child abnormal and obscene, 
Beside a maiden giantess to have lived, 
Like a luxurious cat at the feet of a queen;

To see her body flowering with her soul, 
And grow, unchained, in awe-inspiring art, 
Within the mists across her eyes that stole 
To divine the fires entombed within her heart. 

And oft to scramble o'er her mighty limbs, 
And climb the slopes of her enormous knees, 
Or in summer when the scorching sunlight streams 

Across the country, to recline at ease, 
And slumber in the shadow of her breast 
Like an hamlet 'neath the mountain-crest. 

Giantess

When Nature once in lustful hot undress
Conceived gargantuan offspring, then would I
Have loved to live near a young giantess,
Like a voluptuous cat at a queen's feet.

To see her body flower with her desire
And freely spread out in its dreadful play,
Guess if her heart concealed some heavy fire
Whose humid smokes would swim upon her eye.

To feel at leisure her stupendous shapes,
Crawl on the cliffs of her enormous knees,
And, when in summer the unhealthy suns

Have stretched her out across the plains, fatigued, 
Sleep in the shadows of her breasts at ease
Like a small hamlet at a mountain's base.


The Giantess

When Nature in her lavish lustiness 
Bred day by day new, strange monstrosities, 
Would I had lived with a young giantess 
Like a warm cat who at a queen's feet lies. 

'Twere sweet to watch her soul and body blossom 
While she disported her in terrible wise; 
To guess if a fierce flame burnt in her bosom 
By the wet mists that swam within her eyes. 

Ah! freely o'er her mighty limbs to run, 
To crawl upon the bend of her vast knees, 
And when in summer, tired of the pestilent sun, 

Across the plain she stretches calm and still, 
Within her breasts' cool shade to sleep at ease 
Like some small hamlet sheltered by a hill. 

The Jewels

My darling was naked, and knowing my heart well, 
She was wearing only her sonorous jewels, 
Whose opulent display made her look triumphant 
Like Moorish concubines on their fortunate days.

When it dances and flings its lively, mocking sound, 
This radiant world of metal and of gems 
Transports me with delight; I passionately love 
All things in which sound is mingled with light.

She had lain down; and let herself be loved 
From the top of the couch she smiled contentedly 
Upon my love, deep and gentle as the sea, 
Which rose toward her as toward a cliff.

Her eyes fixed upon me, like a tamed tigress, 
With a vague, dreamy air she was trying poses, 
And by blending candor with lechery, 
Her metamorphoses took on a novel charm;

And her arm and her leg, and her thigh and her loins,
Shiny as oil, sinuous as a swan,
Passed in front of my eyes, clear-sighted and serene;
And her belly, her breasts, grapes of my vine,

Advanced, more cajoling than angels of evil, 
To trouble the quiet that had possessed my soul, 
To dislodge her from the crag of crystal, 
Where calm and alone she had taken her seat.

I thought I saw blended in a novel design
Antiope's haunches and the breast of a boy,
Her waist set off so well the fullness of her hips.
On that tawny brown skin the rouge stood out superb!

-- And when at last the lamp allowed itself to die,
Since the fire alone lighted the room,
Each time that it uttered a flaming sigh,
It drenched with blood that amber colored skin!

The Jewels

My well-beloved was stripped. Knowing my whim, 
She wore her tinkling gems, but naught besides: 
And showed such pride as, while her luck betides, 
A sultan's favoured slave may show to him.

When it lets off its lively, crackling sound, 
This blazing blend of metal crossed with stone, 
Gives me an ecstasy I've only known 
Where league of sound and lustre can be found.

She let herself be loved: then, drowsy-eyed, 
Smiled down from her high couch in languid ease. 
My love was deep and gentle as the seas 
And rose to her as to a cliff the tide.

My own approval of each dreamy pose,
Like a tarned tiger, cunningly she sighted:
And candour, with lubricity united,
Gave piquancy to every one she chose,

Her limbs and hips, burnished with changing lustres,
Before my eyes clairvoyant and serene,
Swarmed themselves, undulating in their sheen;
Her breasts and belly, of my vine the clusters,

Like evil angels rose, my fancy twitting, 
To kill the peace which over me she'd thrown, 
And to disturb her from the crystal throne 
Where, calm and solitary, she was sitting.

So swerved her pelvis that, in one design, 
Antiope's white rump it seemed to graft 
To a boy's torso, merging fore and aft. 
The talc on her brown tan seemed half-divine.

The lamp resigned its dying flame. Within, 
The hearth alone lit up the darkened air, 
And every time it sighed a crimson flare 
It drowned in blood that amber-coloured skin.

The Jewels

The lovely one was naked and, knowing well my prayer, 
She wore her loud bright armory of jewels. They 
Evoked in her the savage and victorious air 
Of Moorish concubines upon a holiday.

When it gives forth, being shaken, its gay mocking noise, 
This world of metal and of stone, aflare in the night, 
Excites me monstrously, for chiefest of my joys 
Is the luxurious commingling of sound and light.

Relaxed among the pillows, she looked down at me 
And let herself be gazed upon at leisure -- as if 
Lulled by my wordless adoration, like the sea 
Washing perpetually about the foot of a cliff.

Slowly, regarding me like a trained leopardess, 
She slouched into successive poses. A certain ease, 
A certain candor coupled with lasciviousness, 
Lent a new charm to the old metamorphoses.

The whole lithe harmony of loins, hips, buttocks, thighs,
Tawny and sleek, and undulant as the neck of a swan,
Began to move hypnotically before my eyes:
And her large breasts, those fruits I have grown lean upon,

I saw float toward me, tempting as the angels of hell, 
To win my soul in thralldom to their dark caprice 
Once more, and lure it down from the high citadel 
Where, calm and solitary, it thought to have found peace.

She stretched and reared, and made herself all belly. In truth,
It was as if some playful artist had joined the stout
Hips of Antiope to the torso of a youth!...
The room grew dark, the lamp having flickered and gone out,

And now the whispering fire that had begun to die, 
Falling in lucent embers, was all the light therein -- 
And when it heaved at moments a flamboyant sigh 
It inundated as with blood her amber skin.

The Jewels

Naked was my dark love, and, knowing my heart, 
Adorned in but her most sonorous gems, 
Their high pomp decked her with the conquering art 
Of Moorish slave girls crowned with diadems.

Dancing for me with lively, mocking sound, 
This world of stone and metal, brittle and bright, 
Fills me with rapture who have always found 
Excess of joy where hue and tone unite.

Naked she lay, suffered love pleasurably 
To mould her, smiled on my desire as if, 
Profound and gentle as the rising sea, 
It rode the tide toward its appointed cliff.

A tiger, tamed, her eyes on mine, intent 
On lust, she sought all strange ways to please: 
Her air, half-candid, half-lascivious, lent 
A new charm to her metamorphoses.

In turn, her arms and limbs, her veins, her thighs,
Polished as nard, undulant as a swan,
Passed under my serene clairvoyant eyes
As belly and breasts, grapes of my vine, moved on.

Skilled in more spells than evil angels muster
To break the solace which possessed my heart,
Smashing the crystal rock upon whose luster
My quietude sat on its own, apart,

Her waist, awrithe, her belly enormously 
Out-thrust, formed strange designs unknown to us,
As if the haunches of Antiope 
Flowed from a body not yet Ephebus.

Slowly the lamplight sank, resigned to die.
Firelight pierced darkness, stud on glowing stud, 
Each time it heaved a sharply flaming sigh 
It steeped her amber flesh in pools of blood.

Jewels

The darling one was naked and, knowing my wish,
Had kept only the regalia of her jewelry
Whose resonant charms can lure and vanquish
Like a Moorish, slave-girl's in her moment of glory.

A world of dazzling stones and of precious metals
Flinging, in its quick rhythm, glints of mockery
Ravishes me into ecstasy, I love to madness
The mingling of sounds and lights in one intricacy.

Naked, then, she was to all of my worship,
Smiling in triumph from the heights of her couch
At my desire advancing, as gentle and deep
As the sea sending its waves to the warm beach.

Her eyes fixed as a tiger's in the tamer's trance,
Absent, unthinking, she varied her poses
With an audacity and wild innocence
That gave a strange pang to each metamorphosis.

Her long legs, her hips, shining smooth as oil,
Her arms and her thighs, undulant as a swan,
Lured my serene, clairvoyant gaze to travel
To her belly and breasts, the grapes of my vine.

With a charm as powerful as an evil angel
To trouble the calm where my soul had retreated,
They advanced slowly to dislodge it from its crystal
Rock, where its loneliness meditated.

With the hips of Antiope, the torso of a boy,
So deeply was the one form sprung into the other
It seemed as if desire had fashioned a new toy.
Her farded, fawn-brown skin was perfection to either!

-- And the lamp having at last resigned itself to death,
There was nothing now but firelight in the room,
And every time a flame uttered a gasp for breath
It flushed her amber skin with the blood of its bloom.

Exotic Perfume

When, with both my eyes closed, on a hot autumn night, 
I inhale the fragrance of your warm breast 
I see happy shores spread out before me, 
On which shines a dazzling and monotonous sun;

A lazy isle to which nature has given 
Singular trees, savory fruits, 
Men with bodies vigorous and slender, 
And women in whose eyes shines a startling candor.

Guided by your fragrance to these charming countries,
I see a port filled with sails and rigging
Still utterly wearied by the waves of the sea,

While the perfume of the green tamarinds, 
That permeates the air, and elates my nostrils, 
Is mingled in my soul with the sailors' chanteys.

Exotic Perfume

When I, with eyes shut, on warm autumn eves, 
The fragrance of your warmer breast respire, 
I see a country bathed in solar fire 
Whose happy shores its lustre never leaves;

An isle of indolence, where nature raises 
Singular trees and fruits both sweet and tender, 
Where men have bodies vigorous and slender 
And women's eyes a candour that amazes.

Led by your scent to fairer climes at last, 
I see a port of sails, where every mast 
Seems weary of the labours of its cruise;

While scents of tamarind, blown here and there, 
Swelling my nostrils as they rinse the air, 
Are mingled with the chanties of the crews.

Exotic Perfume

On autumn nights, eyes closed, when, sensuous,
I breathe the scent of your warm breasts, my sight
Is peopled by far shores, happy and bright,
Under a sun, warm and monotonous.
A lazy isle which nature, generous,
Stocks with weird trees and fruits of strange delight,
Men with lithe bodies, powerful but slight,
Women whose candid eyes flash luminous.

Urged by your scent to such charmed lands at last, 
I see a port with many a sail and mast 
Still weary from the ocean's frenzied roll, 
While the green tamarinds exhale their savor 
To please my nostrils with a dulcet flavor, 
Mingled with sailor chanteys in my soul.

Exotic Fragrance

When, with closed eyes in the warm autumn night,
I breathe the fragrance of thy bosom bare,
My dream unfurls a clime of loveliest air,
Drenched in the fiery sun's unclouded light.

An indolent island dowered with heaven's delight,
Trees singular and fruits of savour rare,
Men having sinewy frames robust and spare,
And women whose clear eyes are wondrous bright.

Led by thy fragrance to those shores I hail
A charmed harbour thronged with mast and sail,
Still wearied with the quivering sea's unrest;

What time the scent of the green tamarinds
That thrills the air and fills my swelling breast
Blends with the mariners' song and the sea-winds.

Exotic Perfume

When, with closed eyes, on a hot afternoon, 
The scent of thine ardent breast I inhale, 
Celestial vistas my spirit assail;
Caressed by the flames of an endless sun. 

A langorous island, where Nature abounds 
With exotic trees and luscious fruit; 
And with men whose bodies are slim and astute, 
And with women whose frankness delights and astounds. 

By thy perfume enticed to this region remote, 
A port I see, laden with mast and with boat, 
Still wearied and torn by the distant brine;

While the tamarisk-odours that dreamily throng 
The air, round my slumberous senses intwine, 
And mix, in my soul, with the mariners' song. 

Parfum exotique

when with closed eyes I drink the halcyon
warm autumn evening, on thy burning breast,
I see unfurl the atolls of the blest,
blazing in flame from an unchanging sun;

an isle of rest, where Nature's benison
breeds trees unique and fruits of savoury zest;
tall men who stride in vigour manifest;
women whose eyes of candour startle one.

I drift, thy fragrance bearing me afar,
into a port where every sail and spar
sway, wearied by the sea's beleaguering,

-- where tamarinds bloom and draughts of perfume winging
through widening nostrils, blend in me to bring
the wind-blown chanteys mariners are singing.

The Exotic Perfume

When, with both eyes shut, on a close autumn evening, 
I breathe the perfume of your heated breast,
I see happy shores unfold themselves 
Dazzling in the flames of a monotonous sun;

A lay island where Nature bestows 
Peculiar trees and savory fruit; 
Men with bodies slim and virile, 
Women with eyes of astonishing candor.

Led by your odor to climates of charm,
I see a harbor full of sails and masts
Still tired by the waves of the sea,

Whilst the perfume of green tamarind-trees 
Circles the air and fills my nostrils, 
Meets in my soul with the song of the seamen.

<i>I Adore You as Much as the Nocturnal Vault...</i>

I adore you as much as the nocturnal vault, 
O vase of sadness, most taciturn one, 
I love you all the more because you flee from me, 
And because you appear, ornament of my nights, 
More ironically to multiply the leagues 
That separate my arms from the blue infinite.

I advance to attack, and I climb to assault, 
Like a swarm of maggots after a cadaver, 
And I cherish, implacable and cruel beast, 
Even that coldness which makes you more beautiful.

<i>More Than Night's Vault, It's You That I Adore</i>

More than night's vault, it's you that I adore, 
Vessel of sorrow, silent one, the more 
Because you flee from me, and seem to place, 
Ornament of my nights! more leagues of space 
Ironically between me and you 
Than part me from these vastitudes of blue.

I charge, attack, and mount to the assault
As worms attack a corpse within a vault.
And cherish even the coldness that you boast,
By which, harsh beast, you subjugate me most.

I Worship You

I worship you, O proud and taciturn,
As I do night's high vault; O sorrow's urn,
I love you all the more because you flee
And seem, gem of my nights, ironically
To multiply the weary leagues that sunder
My arms from all infinity's blue wonder.

I skirmish and I climb to the attack,
I, a worms' chorus on a corpse's back,
O fierce cruel beast, I cherish to the full
The very chill that makes you beautiful.

<i>You Would Take the Whole World to Bed with You</i>

You would take the whole world to bed with you, 
Impure woman! Ennui makes your soul cruel; 
To exercise your teeth at this singular game, 
You need a new heart in the rack each day. 
Your eyes, brilliant as shop windows 
Or as blazing lamp-stands at public festivals, 
Insolently use a borrowed power 
Without ever knowing the law of their beauty.

Blind, deaf machine, fecund in cruelties! 
Remedial instrument, drinker of the world's blood, 
Why are you not ashamed and why have you not seen 
In every looking-glass how your charms are fading? 
Why have you never shrunk at the enormity 
Of this evil at which you think you are expert, 
When Nature, resourceful in her hidden designs, 
Makes use of you, woman, O queen of sin, 
Of you, vile animal, -- to fashion a genius?

O foul magnificence! Sublime ignominy!

<i>You'd Stick the World into Your Bedside Lane</i>

You'd stick the world into your bedside lane. 
It's boredom makes you callous to all pain. 
To exercise your teeth for this strange task, 
A heart upon a rake, each day, you'd ask. 
Your eyes lit up like shopfronts, or the trees 
With lanterns on the night of public sprees, 
Make insolent misuse of borrowed power 
And scorn the law of beauty that's their dower.

Oh deaf-and-dumb machine, harm-breeding fool 
World sucking leech, yet salutary tool! 
Have you not seen your beauties blanch to pass 
Before their own reflection in the glass? 
Before this pain, in which you think you're wise, 
Does not its greatness shock you with surprise, 
To think that Nature, deep in projects hidden, 
Has chosen you, vile creature of the midden, 
To knead a genius for succeeding time.

O sordid grandeur! Infamy sublime!

Tyranny of Woman

Aye, you would bed with the whole universe, 
Lewd woman! Ennui makes your soul perverse; 
Cruel, you whet your teeth at this weird play, 
You need a fresh heart in the rack each day. 
Your eyes blaze like illumined shops or lights 
Of serried lamps on festive public nights,
They use a borrowed puissance haughtily 
Unconscious of their beauty's tyranny.

Blind, deaf machine, geared to increase man's pain, 
Tool primed to suckle blood from his last vein, 
Have you no shame when every looking glass 
Betrays your faded beauties as you pass, 
When cunning Nature's hidden plans begin 
To use you, beast! woman, vile queen of sin, 
To fashion genius in carnality?

O shameless might! Sublime ignominy!

<i>You'd Take the Entire Universe to Bed with You</i>

You'd take the entire universe to bed with you, 
I think, just out of boredom, you lecherous, idle shrew!
You need, to keep your teeth sound, exercise your jaws, 
Daily, for dinner, some new heart between your paws! 
Your eyes, all lighted up like shops, like public fairs, 
How insolent they are! -- as if their power were theirs 
Indeed! -- this borrowed power, this Beauty, you direct 
And use, whose law, however, you do not suspect.

Unwholesome instrument for health, O deaf machine 
And blind, fecund in tortures! -- how is it you have not seen, 
You drinker of the world's blood, your mirrored loveliness 
Blench and recoil? how is it you feel no shame? confess: 
Has never, then, this evil's very magnitude 
Caused you to stagger? -- you, who think yourself so shrewd 
In evil? -- seeing how Nature, patient and abstruse -- 
O Woman, Queen of Sins, Vile Animal, -- has made use 
Of you, to mould a genius? -- employed you all this time?

O muddy grandeur! -- ignominy ironic and sublime!

Unslakeable Lust

Singular deity, brown as the nights,
Scented with the perfume of Havana and musk,
Work of some obeah, Faust of the savanna,
Witch with ebony flanks, child of the black midnight,

I prefer to <i>constance,</i> to opium, to <i>nuits,</i> 
The nectar of your mouth upon which love parades; 
When toward you my desires set out in caravan, 
Your eyes are the cistern that gives drink to my cares.

Through those two great black eyes, the outlets of your soul,
O pitiless demon! pour upon me less flame;
I'm not the River Styx to embrace you nine times,

Alas! and I cannot, licentious Megaera, 
To break your spirit and bring you to bay 
In the hell of your bed turn into Proserpine!

Sed non Satiata

Strange goddess, brown as evening to the sight, 
Whose scent is half of musk, half of havanah, 
Work of some obi, Faust of the Savanah, 
Ebony witch, and daughter of the night.

By far preferred to troth, or drugs, or sleep, 
Love vaunts the red elixir of your mouth. 
My caravan of longings seeks in drouth 
Your eyes, the wells at which my cares drink deep.

Through those black eyes, by which your soul respires, 
Pitiless demon! pour less scorching fires. 
I am no Styx nine times with flame to wed.

Nor can I turn myself to Proserpine 
To break your spell, Megera libertine! 
Within the dark inferno of your bed.

Sed Non Satiata

Dusky as tropic nights, O bizarre deity,
Redolent of havana, musk and cordovan,
What obeah man or Faust of the Caribbean,
Wrought you, child-witch of night, with flanks of ebony?
Better than opium or Constanta Wine or <i>Nuits,</i>
Your nectar mouth where Love swoons in a slow pavane,
When my desires set forth, a serried caravan,
Your eyes are the twin wells where I can slake ennui.

From out these wide black eyes which are your spirit's vent, 
Heap fires less fierce upon me. O impenitent, 
I am no tireless Styx to gird you nine times nine, 
I am no lustful Fury to exhaust your lust, 
To break your vigor or to make you bite the dust 
Or in your bed's hell turn into a Proserpine.

Sed Non Satiata

Strange deity, brown as nights,
Whose perfume is mixed with musk and Havanah,
Magical creation, Faust of the savanna,
Sorceress with the ebony thighs, child of black midnights,

I prefer to African wines, to opium, to burgundy, 
The elixir of your mouth where love parades itself; 
When my desires leave in caravan for you, 
Your eyes are the reservoir where my cares drink.

From those two great black eyes, chimneys of our spirit,
O pitiless demon, throw out less flame at me;
I am no Styx to clasp you nine times,

Nor can I, alas, dissolute shrew,
To break your courage, bring you to bay,
Become any Proserpine in the hell of your bed!

<i>With Her Pearly, Undulating Dresses</i>

With her pearly, undulating dresses, 
Even when she's walking, she seems to be dancing 
Like those long snakes which the holy fakirs 
Set swaying in cadence on the end of their staffs.

Like the dull sand and the blue of deserts, 
Both of them unfeeling toward human suffering, 
Like the long web of the ocean's billows, 
She unfurls herself with unconcern.

Her glossy eyes are made of charming minerals
And in that nature, symbolic and strange,
Where pure angel is united with ancient sphinx,

Where everything is gold, steel, light and diamonds, 
There glitters forever, like a useless star, 
The frigid majesty of the sterile woman.

<i>With Waving Opalescence in Her Gown</i>

With waving opalescence in her gown, 
Even when she walks along, you think she's dancing. 
Like those long snakes which charmers, while entrancing,
Wave with their wands, in cadence, up and down.

Like the sad sands of deserts and their skies,
By human sufferings untouched and free,
Or like the surfy curtains of the sea,
She flaunts a cold indifference. Her eyes

Are made of charming minerals well-burnished. 
Her nature, both by sphynx and angel furnished, 
Is old, intact, symbolic, and bizarre:

She seems, made all of gems, steel, light, and gold, 
In barrenness, majestic, hard, and cold, 
To blaze forever, like a useless star.

XXVIII Sonnet

In undulant robes with nacreous sheen impearled
She walks as in some stately saraband;
Or like lithe snakes by sacred charmers curled
In cadence wreathing on the slender wand.

Calm as blue wastes of sky and desert sand
That watch unmoved the sorrows of this world;
With slow regardless sweep as on the strand
The long swell of the woven sea-waves swirled.

Her polished orbs are like a mystic gem,
And, while this strange and symbolled being links
The inviolate angel and the antique sphinx,

Insphered in gold, steel, light and diadem
The splendour of a lifeless star endows
With clear cold majesty the barren spouse.

Sonnet XXVIII

With pearly robes that wave within the wind, 
Even when she walks, she seems to dance, 
Like swaying serpents round those wands entwined 
Which fakirs wave in rhythmic elegance. 

So like the desert's Blue, and the sands remote, 
Both, deaf to mortal suffering and to strife, 
Or like the sea-weeds 'neath the waves that float, 
Indifferently she moulds her budding life. 

Her polished eyes are made of minerals bright, 
And in her mien, symbolical and cold, 
Wherein an angel mingles with a sphinx of old, 

Where all is gold, and steel, and gems, and light, 
There shines, just like a useless star eternally, 
The sterile woman's frigid majesty. 

<i>Avec ses vetements ondoyants et nacres</i>

with all her undulant pearly draperies,
she moves in measures lovelier than a dance,
as in the fakirs' Indian sorceries
tall cobras 'neath a moving rod advance

like drear Sahara's sand or azure skies,
insentient both to human suffering,
like the long lacy nets the surges bring,
her slow indifferent length she amplifies.

her eyes are made from agates polished bright,
and in that strange symbolic soul which links
the inviolate angel and the fabled sphynx,

where all is gold, steel, diamonds and light,
glitters forever, starlike, far, inhuman,
the regal coldness of the sterile woman.

Sonnet

With her dresses undulating, pearly, 
Even walking one would think her dancing, 
Like those long serpents which holy charmers 
Move in harmony at the tips of their batons.

Like the dull sand and the blue of deserts, 
Unmoved alike by human pain, 
Like the long fabric of the swell of seas, 
She unfolds herself with indifference.

Her polished eyes are of delicious metals,
And in this strange, symbolic nature
Where virgin angel meets with ancient sphinx,

Where all is only gold and steel and light and diamonds, 
There shines for ever, like a useless star, 
The cold majesty of the sterile woman.

The Dancing Serpent

Indolent darling, how I love
To see the skin
Of your body so beautiful
Shimmer like silk!

Upon your heavy head of hair
With its acrid scents,
Adventurous, odorant sea
With blue and brown waves,

Like a vessel that awakens
To the morning wind,
My dreamy soul sets sail
For a distant sky.

Your eyes where nothing is revealed
Of bitter or sweet,
Are two cold jewels where are mingled
Iron and gold.

To see you walking in cadence
With fine abandon,
One would say a snake which dances
On the end of a staff.

Under the weight of indolence
Your child-like head sways
Gently to and fro like the head
Of a young elephant,

And your body stretches and leans
Like a slender ship
That rolls from side to side and dips
Its yards in the sea.

Like a stream swollen by the thaw
Of rumbling glaciers,
When the water of your mouth rises
To the edge of your teeth,

It seems I drink Bohemian wine,
Bitter and conquering,
A liquid sky that scatters
Stars in my heart!

The Snake that Dances

I love to watch, while you are lazing,
Your skin. It iridesces
Like silk or satin, smoothly-glazing
The light that it caresses.

Under your tresses dark and deep
Where acrid perfumes drown,
A fragrant sea whose breakers sweep
In mazes blue or brown,

My soul, a ship, to the attraction
Of breezes that bedizen
Its swelling canvas, clears for action
And seeks a far horizon.

Your eyes where nothing can be seen
Either of sweet or bitter
But gold and iron mix their sheen,
Seem frosty gems that glitter.

To see you rhythmically advancing
Seems to my fancy fond
As if it were a serpent dancing
Waved by the charmer's wand.

Under the languorous moods that weigh it,
Your childish head bows down:
Like a young elephant's you sway it
With motions soft as down.

Your body leans upon the hips
Like a fine ship that Iaves
Its hull from side to side, and dips 
Its yards into the waves.

When, as by glaciers ground, the spate
Swells hissing from beneath,
The water of your mouth, elate,
Rises between your teeth -- 

It seems some old Bohemian vintage
Triumphant, fierce, and tart,
A liquid heaven that showers a mintage 
Of stars across my heart.

The Dancing Serpent

Dear indolent, I love to see,
In your body bright,
How like shimmering silk the skin
Reflects the light !

On the deep ocean of your hair
Where perfume laves,
Odorous and vagabond sea
Of blue and brown waves,

Like a vessel awakening
When morning winds rise
My dreaming soul begins to sail
Toward remote skies.

Your two eyes that neither sweetness
Nor bitterness hold
Are two chilly gems mingled of
Iron and gold.

When you walk in rhythm, lovely
With abandonment,
You seem to be swayed by a wand,
A dancing serpent.

Your child's head under the burden
Of your indolence
Sways as delicately as a
Young elephant's,

And your body bends and straightens
Like a slender ship
That, plunging and rolling, lets the
Yards in water dip.

When, like a stream by thawing of
Glaciers made replete,
The water of your mouth rises
Up to your teeth,

I drink a Bohemian wine,
Powerful and tart,
A liquid sky that sows its stars
Within my heart !

Dancing Serpent

Indolent love, with what delight
I watch the tawny flesh
Of your sweet body shimmer bright
As a bright silken mesh.

On your thick tresses, love, you wear
Sharp perfumes for a crown,
A venturesome sweet sea, your hair,
With billows blue and brown.

Your eyes never betray by sign
What grief or joy they hold,
They are cold jewels that combine
Strong iron and rare gold.

Even as a vessel that awakes
When morning breezes rise,
So my dream-laden spirit takes
Off for strange distant skies.

Your sinuous cadenced walk enhancing
Your slim proud gait, a frond
Swaying, you are, or a snake dancing
Atop a fakir's wand.

Under a laziness like lead
Your childlike head aslant
Sways soft and gentle as the head
Of a young elephant,

Your body like a slender ship
In tense or bowing motion
Rolls, slow, from side to side to dip
Its yards deep in the ocean.

Ice thawed by currents from the south 
Swell the swift streams beneath,
So when the water of your mouth 
Rises against your teeth,

I seem to drink Bohemian wine 
Victorious and tart,
A liquid sky that strews benign 
Stars in my peaceful heart.

The Dancing Serpent

How I love to watch, dear indolent creature,
The skin of your so
Beautiful body glisten, like some
Quivering material!

On your deep coiffure
Bitter scented,
Scented, restless sea,
With the blue and brown waves,

Like a ship waking
To the wind of morning,
My dreamy soul prepares
For skies far away.

Your eyes, where nothing is revealed
Of sweet or sour,
Are two cold gems whose gold
Is mixed with iron.

Seeing your harmonious walk,
Abandoned beauty,
One would say a snake was dancing
At the end of a stick.

Under the weight of your sloth
Your infant head
Is balanced with the indolence
Of a young elephant,

And your body bends and stretches
Like a delicate ship
Pitching from side to side and sinking
Its spars in the water.

Like a wave swelled by the melting
Of a groaning glacier,
When your saliva rises
To the edges of your teeth,

I feel I drink some Bohemian wine,
Bitter, victor,
A liquid sky that scatters
Stars in my heart!

A Carcass

My love, do you recall the object which we saw, 
That fair, sweet, summer morn!
At a turn in the path a foul carcass
On a gravel strewn bed,

Its legs raised in the air, like a lustful woman, 
Burning and dripping with poisons,
Displayed in a shameless, nonchalant way 
Its belly, swollen with gases.

The sun shone down upon that putrescence, 
As if to roast it to a turn,
And to give back a hundredfold to great Nature 
The elements she had combined;

And the sky was watching that superb cadaver 
Blossom like a flower.
So frightful was the stench that you believed 
You'd faint away upon the grass.

The blow-flies were buzzing round that putrid belly,
From which came forth black battalions
Of maggots, which oozed out like a heavy liquid 
All along those living tatters.

All this was descending and rising like a wave, 
Or poured out with a crackling sound;
One would have said the body, swollen with a vague breath, 
Lived by multiplication.

And this world gave forth singular music, 
Like running water or the wind,
Or the grain that winnowers with a rhythmic motion 
Shake in their winnowing baskets.

The forms disappeared and were no more than a dream, 
A sketch that slowly falls
Upon the forgotten canvas, that the artist 
Completes from memory alone.

Crouched behind the boulders, an anxious dog 
Watched us with angry eye,
Waiting for the moment to take back from the carcass 
The morsel he had left.

-- And yet you will be like this corruption,
Like this horrible infection,
Star of my eyes, sunlight of my being, 
You, my angel and my passion!

Yes! thus will you be, queen of the Graces,
After the last sacraments,
When you go beneath grass and luxuriant flowers, 
To molder among the bones of the dead.

Then, O my beauty! say to the worms who will
Devour you with kisses,
That I have kept the form and the divine essence 
Of my decomposed love!

The Carcase

The object that we saw, let us recall, 
This summer morn when warmth and beauty mingle -- 
At the path's turn, a carcase lay asprawl
Upon a bed of shingle.

Legs raised, like some old whore far-gone in passion, 
The burning, deadly, poison-sweating mass 
Opened its paunch in careless, cynic fashion, 
Ballooned with evil gas.

On this putrescence the sun blazed in gold, 
Cooking it to a turn with eager care -- 
So to repay to Nature, hundredfold, 
What she had mingled there.

The sky, as on the opening of a flower, 
On this superb obscenity smiled bright. 
The stench drove at us, with such fearsome power 
You thought you'd swoon outright.

Flies trumpeted upon the rotten belly 
Whence larvae poured in legions far and wide, 
And flowed, like molten and liquescent jelly, 
Down living rags of hide.

The mass ran down, or, like a wave elated 
Rolled itself on, and crackled as if frying: 
You'd think that corpse, by vague breath animated, 
Drew life from multiplying.

Through that strange world a rustling rumour ran 
Like rushing water or a gust of air, 
Or grain that winnowers, with rhythmic fan, 
Sweep simmering here and there.

It seemed a dream after the forms grew fainter, 
Or like a sketch that slowly seems to dawn 
On a forgotten canvas, which the painter 
From memory has drawn.

Behind the rocks a restless cur that slunk 
Eyed us with fretful greed to recommence 
His feast, amidst the bonework, on the chunk 
That he had torn from thence.

Yet you'll resemble this infection too 
One day, and stink and sprawl in such a fashion, 
Star of my eyes, sun of my nature, you, 
My angel and my passion!

Yes, you must come to this, O queen of graces, 
At length, when the last sacraments are over, 
And you go down to moulder in dark places 
Beneath the grass and clover.

Then tell the vermin as it takes its pleasance 
And feasts with kisses on that face of yours, 
I've kept intact in form and godlike essence 
Our decomposed amours!

A Carcass

Recall to mind the sight we saw, my soul,
That soft, sweet summer day:
Upon a bed of flints a carrion foul,
Just as we turn'd the way,

Its legs erected, wanton-like, in air,
Burning and sweating pest,
In unconcern'd and cynic sort laid bare
To view its noisome breast.

The sun lit up the rottenness with gold,
To bake it well inclined,
And give great Nature back a hundredfold
All she together join'd.

The sky regarded as the carcass proud
Oped flower-like to the day;
So strong the odour, on the grass you vow'd
You thought to faint away.

The flies the putrid belly buzz'd about,
Whence black battalions throng
Of maggots, like thick liquid flowing out
The living rags along.

And as a wave they mounted and went down,
Or darted sparkling wide;
As if the body, by a wild breath blown,
Lived as it multiplied.

From all this life a music strange there ran,
Like wind and running burns;
Or like the wheat a winnower in his fan
With rhythmic movement turns.

The forms wore off, and as a dream grew faint,
An outline dimly shown,
And which the artist finishes to paint
From memory alone.

Behind the rocks watch'd us with angry eye
A bitch disturb'd in theft,
Waiting to take, till we had pass'd her by,
The morsel she had left.

Yet you will be like that corruption too,
Like that infection prove --
Star of my eyes, sun of my nature, you,
My angel and my love!

Queen of the graces, you will even be so,
When, the last ritual said,
Beneath the grass and the fat flowers you go,
To mould among the dead.

Then, O my beauty, tell the insatiate worm
Who wastes you with his kiss,
I have kept the godlike essence and the form
Of perishable bliss!

Carrion

Darling, do you recall that thing we found
("A lovely summer day!" you said)
That noisome carcass where the path swung round
A sprawling pebble-covered bed.

Its legs raised like a whore's in lubric play,
It burned, oozing rank fetors there,
Shameless and nonchalant, it offered day
Its belly. Poisons filled the air.

The sun beat down on this putrescent mold
As if to fry it to a turn,
To give great Nature back one hundredfold
All she had gathered in her urn.

The skies watched that proud carcass, lax or taut,
Bloom like a flowery mass.
So pungent was the stench, my love, you thought
To swoon away upon the grass.

Horseflies buzzed loud over this putrid belly,
Whence sallied column and battalion
Of sable maggots, flowing like a mucose jelly,
Over this live tatterdemalion.

Waves seemed to rise and fall over this mass,
Spurting with crepitation,
As though this corpse, filled with breaths of gas,
Lived by multiplication.

This world uttered a curious melody,
Like waters, wind, or grains of wheat
That winnowers keep stirring rhythmically
In the broad baskets at their feet.

The forms, fading into a dream, grew fainter;
Here was a sketch of misty tone
On a forgotten canvas which the painter
Completes from memory alone.

Hiding behind the rocks, an anxious bitch
Stood, watching us with angry eye,
Poised to regain the olid morsel which,
Hearing us come, she had laid by.

-- Yet shall you be like this ordurous blight,
You, too, shall rot in just such fashion,
Star of my eyes, sun of my soul's delight,
Aye, you, my angel and my passion.

Such you, O queen of graces, in the hours,
When the last sacrament is said,
That bear you under rich sods and Iush flower
To molder with the moldering dead.

Then, O my beauty! Tell such worms as will
Kiss you in ultimate coition
That I have kept the form and essence of
My love in its decomposition.

A Carrion

Rememberest thou, my sweet, that summer's day, 
How in the sun outspread 
At a path's bend a filthy carcase lay 
Upon a pebbly bed? 

Like a lewd woman, with its legs in air, 
Burned, oozed the poisonous mass; 
Its gaping belly, calm and debonair, 
Was full of noisome gas. 

And steadily upon this rottenness. 
As though to cook it brown 
And render Nature hundredfold excess. 
The sun shone down. 

The blue sky thought the carrion marvellous, 
A flower most fair to see; 
And as we gazed it almost poisoned us -- 
It stank so horribly. 

The flies buzzed on this putrid belly, whence 
Black hosts of maggots came, 
Which streamed in thick and shining rivers thence 
Along that ragged frame. 

Pulsating like a wave, spirting about 
Bright jets, it seemed to live; 
As though it were by some vague wind blown out, 
Some breath procreative. 

And all this life was strangely musical 
Like wind or bubbling spring, 
Or corn which moves with rhythmic rise and fall 
In time of winnowing. 

The lines became indefinite and faint 
As a thin dream that dies, 
A half-forgotten scene the hand can paint 
Only from memories...

Behind the rocks there lurked a hungry hound 
With melancholy eye, 
Longing to nose the morsel he had found 
And gnaw it greedily. 

Yet thou shalt be as vile a carrion 
As this infection dire, 
O bright star of my eyes, my nature's sun, 
My angel, my desire! 

Yea, such, O queen of the graces, shalt thou be 
After the last soft breath. 
Beneath the grass and the lush greenery 
A-mouldering in death! 

When thy sweet flesh the worms devour with kisses, 
Tell them, O beauty mine. 
Of rotting loves I keep the bodily blisses 
And essence all-divine! 

The Corpse

Remember, my Beloved, what thing we met
By the roadside on that sweet summer day;
There on a grassy couch with pebbles set,
A loathsome body lay.

The wanton limbs stiff-stretched into the air,
Steaming with exhalations vile and dank,
In ruthless cynic fashion had laid bare
The swollen side and flank.

On this decay the sun shone hot from heaven
As though with chemic heat to broil and bum,
And unto Nature all that she had given
A hundredfold return.

The sky smiled down upon the horror there
As on a flower that opens to the day;
So awful an infection smote the air,
Almost you swooned away.

The swarming flies hummed on the putrid side,
Whence poured the maggots in a darkling stream,
That ran along these tatters of life's pride
With a liquescent gleam.

And like a wave the maggots rose and fell,
The murmuring flies swirled round in busy strife:
It seemed as though a vague breath came to swell
And multiply with life

The hideous corpse. From all this living world
A music as of wind and water ran,
Or as of grain in rhythmic motion swirled
By the swift winnower's fan.

And then the vague forms like a dream died out,
Or like some distant scene that slowly falls
Upon the artist's canvas, that with doubt
He only half recalls.

A homeless dog behind the boulders lay
And watched us both with angry eyes forlorn,
Waiting a chance to come and take away
The morsel she had torn.

And you, even you, will be like this drear thing,
A vile infection man may not endure;
Star that I yearn to! Sun that lights my spring!
O passionate and pure!

Yes, such will you be, Queen of every grace!
When the last sacramental words are said;
And beneath grass and flowers that lovely face
Moulders among the dead.

Then, O Beloved, whisper to the worm
That crawls up to devour you with a kiss,
That I still guard in memory the dear form
Of love that comes to this!

A Carrion

Do you remember the thing we saw, my soul,
That summer morning, so beautiful, so soft:
At a turning in the path, a filthy carrion,
On a bed sown with stones,

Legs in the air, like a lascivious woman,
Burning and sweating poisons,
Opened carelessly, cynically,
Its great fetid belly.

The sun shone on this fester,
As though to cook it to a turn,
And to return a hundredfold to great Nature
What she had joined in one;

And the sky saw the superb carcass
Open like a flower.
The stench was so strong, that you might think
To swoon away upon the grass.

The flies swarmed on that rotten belly,
Whence came out black battalions
Of spawn, flowing like a thick liquid
Along its living tatters.

All this rose and fell like a wave,
Or rustled in jerks;
One would have said that the body, fun of a loose breath,
Lived in this its procreation.

And this world gave out a strange music,
Like flowing water and wind,
Or a winnower's grain that he shakes and turns
With rhythmical grace in his basket.

The forms fade and are no more than a dream, 
A sketch slow to come
On the forgotten canvas, and that the artist completes 
Only by memory.

Behind the boulders an anxious bitch
Watched us with angry eyes,
Spying the moment to regain in the skeleton 
The morsel she had dropped.

 --  And yet you will be like this excrement,
This horrible stench,
O star of my eyes, sun of my being, 
You, my angel, my passion.

Yes, such you will be, queen of gracefulness, 
After the last sacraments,
When you go beneath the grasses and fat flowers,
Moldering amongst the bones.

Then, my beauty, say to the vermin
Which will eat you with kisses,
That I have kept the shape and the divine substance 
Of my decomposed loves!

Out of the Depths Have I Cried

I beg pity of Thee, the only one I love, 
From the depths of the dark pit where my heart has fallen, 
It's a gloomy world with a leaden horizon, 
Where through the night swim horror and blasphemy;

A frigid sun floats overhead six months,
And the other six months darkness covers the land;
It's a land more bleak than the polar wastes
-- Neither beasts, nor streams, nor verdure, nor woods!

But no horror in the world can surpass 
The cold cruelty of that glacial sun 
And this vast night which is like old Chaos;

I envy the lot of the lowest animals 
Who are able to sink into a stupid sleep, 
So slowly does the skein of time unwind!

De Profundis Clamavi

Have pity, my one love and sole delight! 
Down to a dark abyss my heart has sounded, 
A mournful world, by grey horizons bounded, 
Where blasphemy and horror swim by night.

For half the year a heatless sun gives light, 
The other half the night obscures the earth. 
The arctic regions never knew such dearth. 
No woods, nor streams, nor creatures meet the sight.

No horror in the world could match in dread 
The cruelty of that dire sun of frost, 
And that huge night like primal chaos spread.

I envy creatures of the vilest kind 
That they in stupid slumber can be lost -- 
So slowly does the skein of time unwind!

De Profundis Clamavi

I do implore thy pity, Thou whom alone I love, 
Deep in this mournful vale wherein my heart is fallen. 
It is a world completely sad, where the low sullen 
Skies seem about to rain pure horror from above.

A fireless sun swims over six months of every year; 
Six months of every year the earth is lost in shadow. 
It is a bleaker land than any Arctic meadow: 
Nor streams, nor flowers, nor fruits, nor birds, nor forests here!

Surely there is no evil imaginable to compare 
With the cruelty of that cold sun in the cold air 
And that enormous night, like the first chaos of things;

I envy the very animals, to whom slumber brings 
Over and over the gift of being thoughtless and blind, 
So slowly does the thread of these dark years unwind.

Out of the Depths

Sole Being I love, Your mercy I implore
Out of the bitter pit of my heart's night,
With leaden skyscapes on a dismal shore,
Peopled only by blasphemy and fright;
For six months frigid suns float overhead,
For six months more darkness and solitude.
No polar wastes are bleaker and more dead,
With never beast nor stream nor plant nor wood.

No horror in this world but is outdone
By the cold razor of this glacial sun
And this chaotic night's immensities.
I envy the most humble beast that ease 
Which brings dull slumber to his brutish soul 
So slowly does my skein of time unroll.

De Profundis Clamavi

O my sole love, I pray thee pity me 
From out this dark gulf where my poor heart lies 
A barren world hemmed in by leaden skies 
Where horror flies at night, and blasphemy. 

For half the year the sickly sun is seen, 
The other half thick night lies on the land, 
A country bleaker than the polar strand; 
No beasts, no brooks, nor any shred of green. 

There never was a horror which surpassed 
This icy sun's cold cruelty, and this vast 
Night like primaeval Chaos; would I were 

Like the dumb brutes, who in a secret lair 
Lie wrapt in stupid slumber for a space...
The time creeps at so burdensome a pace. 

The Vampire

You who, like the stab of a knife,
Entered my plaintive heart;
You who, strong as a herd
Of demons, came, ardent and adorned,

To make your bed and your domain
Of my humiliated mind
-- Infamous bitch to whom I'm bound
Like the convict to his chain,

Like the stubborn gambler to the game, 
Like the drunkard to his wine, 
Like the maggots to the corpse,
-- Accurst, accurst be you!

I begged the swift poniard 
To gain for me my liberty, 
I asked perfidious poison 
To give aid to my cowardice.

Alas! both poison and the knife
Contemptuously said to me:
"You do not deserve to be freed
From your accursed slavery,

Fool! -- if from her domination
Our efforts could deliver you,
Your kisses would resuscitate
The cadaver of your vampire!"

The Vampire

You, who like a dagger ploughed 
Into my heart with deadly thrill: 
You who, stronger than a crowd 
Of demons, mad, and dressed to kill,

Of my dejected soul have made
Your bed, your lodging, and domain:
To whom I'm linked (Unseemly jade!)
As is a convict to his chain,

Or as the gamester to his dice, 
Or as the drunkard to his dram, 
Or as the carrion to its lice -- 
I curse you. Would my curse could damn!

I have besought the sudden blade 
To win for me my freedom back. 
Perfidious poison I have prayed 
To help my cowardice. Alack!

Both poison and the sword disdained
My cowardice, and seemed to say
"You are not fit to be unchained
From your damned servitude. Away,

You imbecile! since if from her empire 
We were to liberate the slave, 
You'd raise the carrion of your vampire, 
By your own kisses, from the grave."

The Vampire

Thou who abruptly as a knife
Didst come into my heart; thou who,
A demon horde into my life,
Didst enter, wildly dancing, through

The doorways of my sense unlatched
To make my spirit thy domain -- 
Harlot to whom I am attached
As convicts to the ball and chain,

As gamblers to the wheel's bright spell, 
As drunkards to their raging thirst, 
As corpses to their worms -- accurst 
Be thou! Oh, be thou damned to hell!

I have entreated the swift sword 
To strike, that I at once be freed; 
The poisoned phial I have implored 
To plot with me a ruthless deed.

Alas! the phial and the blade 
Do cry aloud and laugh at me: 
"Thou art not worthy of our aid; 
Thou art not worthy to be free.

"Though one of us should be the tool
To save thee from thy wretched fate,
Thy kisses would resuscitate
The body of thy vampire, fool!"

The Vampire

Thou, sharper than a dagger thrust
Sinking into my plaintive heart,
Thou, frenzied and arrayed in lust,
Strong as a demon host whose art

Possessed my humbled soul at last,
Made it thy bed and thy domain,
Strumpet, to whom I am bound fast
As is the convict to his chain,

The stubborn gambler to his dice, 
The rabid drunkard to his bowl, 
The carcass to its vermin lice -- 
O thrice-accursed be thy soul!

I called on the swift sword to smite 
One blow to free my life of this, 
I begged perfidious aconite 
For succor in my cowardice.

But sword and poison in my need
Heaped scorn upon my craven mood,
Saying: "Unworthy to be freed,
From thine accursed servitude,

O fool, if through our efforts, Fate 
Absolved thee from thy sorry plight, 
Thy kisses would resuscitate 
Thy vampire's corpse for thy delight."

Lethe

Come, lie upon my breast, cruel, insensitive soul,
Adored tigress, monster with the indolent air;
I want to plunge trembling fingers for a long time
In the thickness of your heavy mane,

To bury my head, full of pain 
In your skirts redolent of your perfume, 
To inhale, as from a withered flower, 
The moldy sweetness of my defunct love.

I wish to sleep! to sleep rather than live! 
In a slumber doubtful as death, 
I shall remorselessly cover with my kisses 
Your lovely body polished like copper.

To bury my subdued sobbing 
Nothing equals the abyss of your bed, 
Potent oblivion dwells upon your lips 
And Lethe flows in your kisses.

My fate, hereafter my delight, 
I'll obey like one predestined; 
Docile martyr, innocent man condemned, 
Whose fervor aggravates the punishment.

I shall suck, to drown my rancor, 
Nepenthe and the good hemlock 
From the charming tips of those pointed breasts 
That have never guarded a heart.

Lethe

Rest on my heart, deaf, cruel soul, adored 
Tigress, and monster with the lazy air. 
I long, in the black jungles of your hair, 
To force each finger thrilling like a sword:

Within wide skirts, filled with your scent, to hide 
My bruised and battered forehead hour by hour, 
And breathe, like dampness from a withered flower, 
The pleasant mildew of a love that died.

Rather than live, I wish to sleep, alas! 
Lulled in a slumber soft and dark as death, 
In ruthless kisses lavishing my breath 
Upon your body smooth as burnished brass.

To swallow up my sorrows in eclipse, 
Nothing can match your couch's deep abysses; 
The stream of Lethe issues from your kisses 
And powerful oblivion from your lips.

Like a predestined victim I submit: 
My doom, to me, henceforth, is my delight, 
A willing martyr in my own despite 
Whose fervour fans the faggots it has lit.

To drown my rancour and to heal its smart, 
Nepenthe and sweet hemlock, peace and rest, 
I'll drink from the twin summits of a breast 
That never lodged the semblance of a heart.

Lethe

Come to my arms, cruel and sullen thing;
Indolent beast, come to my arms again,
For I would plunge my fingers in your mane
And be a long time unremembering -- 

And bury myself in you, and breathe your wild 
Perfume remorselessly for one more hour: 
And breathe again, as of a ruined flower, 
The fragrance of the love you have defiled.

I long to sleep; I think that from a stark 
Slumber like death I could awake the same 
As I was once, and lavish without shame 
Caresses upon your body, glowing and dark.

To drown my sorrow there is no abyss, 
However deep, that can compare with your bed. 
Forgetfulness has made its country your red 
Mouth, and the flowing of Lethe is in your kiss.

My doom, henceforward, is my sole desire:
As martyrs, being demented in their zeal,
Shake with delightful spasms upon the wheel,
Implore the whip, or puff upon the fire,

So I implore you, fervently resigned! 
Come; I would drink nepenthe and long rest 
At the sweet points of this entrancing breast 
Wherein no heart has ever been confined.

Lethe

Tigress adored, indolent fiend, lie there, 
There on my heart now, merciless and strong, 
I wish to run my trembling fingers long 
Through the black tangles of your heavy hair, 
To plunge my aching head amorous of 
Your skirts as into secret, perfumed bowers, 
To breathe your scent as from pale withered flowers 
The after-flavor of my defunct love.

I wish to sleep rather than live, alas!
In slumber deep and sweet as death, O lover,
As my fierce and remorseless kisses cover
Your lovely body, bright as burnished brass,
To bury my stilled sobs in the abysses
Of your anodyne bed, to feast upon
Your lips that shed potent oblivion,
To drink the Lethe flowing in your kisses.

I shall delight in following my fate, 
Obeying it gladly as a man contemned, 
O docile martyr, innocent condemned 
To tortures that his fervors aggravate. 
With suckling lips to quell my spleen and rancor, 
Nepenthe I shall drain, and hemlock's sweets, 
Out of the magic tips of pointed teats 
That never served a human heart for anchor.

Le Lethe

come to my heart, cold viper-soul malign,
beloved tiger, hydra indolent;
long will I drag my hands incontinent
and quivering, through this vast loosed mane of thine;

long will I bury throbbing brow and head
among thy skirts all redolent of thee,
and breathe -- a blighted flower of perfidy --
the fading odour of my passion dead.

I'll sleep, not live! I'll lose myself in sleep!
in slumber soft as Death's uncertain shore,
I'll sleep and sow my drowsy kisses o'er
thy polished coppery arms and bosom deep.

to drown my sobs and still my spirit -- o!
no boon but thine abysmal bed avails;
poppied oblivion from thy mouth exhales
and through thy kisses floods of Lethe flow.

so to my doom, henceforward my desire,
I shall submit as one predestinate;
and like a martyr, calm, immaculate,
whose fervour prods again his flickering pyre,

I'll suck, to drown my hate's eternal smart,
Nepenthe, and good bitter hemlock brew,
from the sharp rose-buds of thy breast, anew,
thy breast that never did contain a heart.

Lethe

Come on my heart, cruel and insensible soul, 
My darling tiger, beast with indolent airs; 
I want to plunge for hours my trembling fingers 
In your thick and heavy mane;

In your petticoats filled with your perfume 
To bury my aching head, 
And breathe, like a faded flower, 
The sweet taste of my dead love.

I want to sleep, to sleep and not to live, 
In a sleep as soft as death, 
I shall cover with remorseless kisses 
Your body beautifully polished as copper.

To swallow my appeased sobbing 
I need only the abyss of your bed; 
A powerful oblivion lives on your lips, 
And all Lethe flows in your kisses.

I shall obey, as though predestined,
My destiny, that is now my delight;
Submissive martyr, innocent damned one,
My ardor inflames my torture,

And I shall suck, to drown my bitterness 
The nepenthe and the good hemlock, 
On the lovely tips of those jutting breasts 
Which have never imprisoned love.

<i>One Night I Lay with a Frightful Jewess</i>

One night I lay with a frightful Jewess, 
Like a cadaver stretched out beside a cadaver, 
And I began to muse, by that peddled body, 
About the sad beauty my desire forgoes.

I pictured to myself her native majesty, 
Her gaze with power and with grace endowed, 
The hair which forms for her a perfumed casque, 
And whose souvenir awakens love's desire.

For I would fervently have kissed your fair body 
And spread out the treasure of soulful caresses 
From your cool feet up to your tresses black,

If, some night, with a tear evoked without effort 
You could only, queen of cruel women! 
Soften the brilliancy of your cold eyes.

<i>One Night When, near a Fearful Jewess Lying</i>

One night when, near a fearful Jewess lying, 
As one corpse by another corpse, I sprawled -- 
Beside the venal body I was buying, 
The beauty that was absent I recalled.

I pictured you in native majesty
With glances full of energy and grace,
Your hair, a perfumed casque, whose memory
Revives me for the amorous embrace,

For madly I'd have kissed your noble frame,
And from your cool feet to your great black tresses,
Unleashed the treasure of profound caresses,

If with a single tear that gently came
You could have quenched, O queen of all the cruel!
The blazing of your eyes, their icy fuel.

A Bed of Shame

One night I lay, a hideous Jewess at my side, 
We were stretched out, corpse to like corpse, on my cold bed,
And all my thoughts, leaving this foul bought body, sped 
To that sad beauty whom my own desire denied. 
I pictured all her native majesty, her pride, 
Her glance in all its force and grace and subtlety, 
Her hair, a perfumed casque, and the mere memory 
Rekindled my love's thirst, ever unsatisfied.

I would have kissed your queenly body fervently, 
Spreading the treasures of my rapturous caresses 
Upward from your cool feet to your warm onyx tresses, 
If some night with a tear bestowed effortlessly 
You could, O queen of cruel women, that I prize, 
Obscure the glacial splendor of your scornful eyes.

Une Nuit Que J'etais Pres d'une Affreuse Juive

A hideous Jewess lay with me for hire 
One night: two corpses side by side we seemed 
And stretched by that polluted thing I dreamed 
Of the sad beauty of my vain desire. 

I thought upon her brow clad round with fire 
And matchless strength, her native majesty, 
Her perfumed helm of hair whose memory 
Makes me toward Love's heights to reaspire. 

For fervently I would have rained, my Sweet, 
Fond kisses over all thy form divine 
Even from thy black tresses to thy feet, 

If some soft evening, with a single tear, 
O cruel queen, thou couldst have dimmed the clear 
Cold splendour of those icy eyes of thine. 

Posthumous Remorse

When you will sleep, O dusky beauty mine,
Beneath a monument fashioned of black marble,
When you will have for bedroom and mansion
Only a rain-swept vault and a hollow grave,

When the slab of stone, oppressing your frightened breast
And your flanks now supple with charming nonchalance,
Will keep your heart from beating, from wishing,
And your feet from running their adventurous course,

The tomb, confidant of my infinite dreams 
(For the tomb will always understand the poet) 
Through those long nights from which all sleep is banned, will say:

"What does it profit you, imperfect courtesan, 
Not to have known why the dead weep?"
-- And like remorse the worm will gnaw your skin.

Posthumous Remorse

When you're asleep, dear shadow-coloured wench, 
Within a coal-black, marble monument: 
When, for your room and mansion, you are pent 
In a wet cellar and a hollow trench:

When the stone, pressing on your startled breast 
And flanks in fluent suppleness competing, 
Prevents your heart from wishing or from beating, 
Your feet from racing on their reckless quest.

The tomb that shares my deathless recollection
(For poets best are understood by tombs)
On those long nights, when never sleep presumes,

Will say, "What boots, frail vase of imperfection,
Not to have known what pains with death begin?" -- 
And, like remorse, the worm will gnaw your skin.

Posthumous Remorse

When, O sweet dusky beauty, you shall rest
Deep under a bleak marble monument,
When for last manor yours the tenement
Of rainswept vault or hollow ditch at best,
When the long stone weighs down your frightened breast
And flanks -- so supple now and indolent -- 
Choking your heart's beat and your feet's intent
To race again on their adventurous quest,

The tomb, confidant of my endless dreams, shall keep
Vigil through those long nights that know not sleep,
(Poet and tomb were friends since Time began)
Saying: "What use, imperfect courtesan,
Not to make known what dead men mourn perforce?"
While the worm gnaws you sharply as remorse.

Remorse Too Late

My dark and lovely thing, when you at length lie dead, 
And sleep beneath a slab of marble black as pitch; 
And have, for perfumed alcove and seductive bed, 
Only a rainy cavern and a hollow ditch;

When the oppressive stone upon your frightened breast 
Lets settle all its weight, and on your supple thighs; 
Restrains your heart from beating, flattens it to rest; 
Bends down and binds your feet, so roving, so unwise;

The tomb, that knows me well and reads my dream aright,
(What poet but confides his secret to the tomb?)
Will say to you some day during that endless night,

"They fare but ill, vain courtesan, in this cold room, 
Who bring here no warm memories of true love to keep!"
-- And like remorse the worm will gnaw you in your sleep.

Posthumous Remorse

Ah, when thou shalt slumber, my darkling love, 
Beneath a black marble-made statuette, 
And when thou'lt have nought for thy house or alcove, 
But a cavernous den and a damp oubliette. 

When the tomb-stone, oppressing thy timorous breast, 
And thy hips drooping sweetly with listless decay, 
The pulse and desires of mine heart shall arrest, 
And thy feet from pursuing their adventurous way, 

Then the grave, that dark friend of my limitless dreams 
(For the grave ever readeth the poet aright), 
Amid those long nights, which no slumber redeems 

'Twill query -- "What use to thee, incomplete spright 
That thou ne'er hast unfathomed the tears of the dead"? --
Then the worms will gnaw deep at thy body, like Dread. 

Remords posthume

when thou wilt sleep, dark girl of shadowy gaze,
down in the cold black marble of a tomb,
a dripping vault thine only tiring-room,
thine only bed a grave where all decays,

when rock shall press thy paling breast and graze
thy limbs now languorous-lovely in the gloom
-- shall crush thy faltering heart, thy will consume
and halt thy feet in their adventurous ways,

the Grave, that knows what infinite dreams I keep,
(o Grave, the poet's friend forever, thou!)
all through the night bereft of exiled sleep,

shall ask: "art sorry, wretched wanton, now,
not to have learned why dead men weep, perforce?"
-- and worms shall gnaw thy breast like sharp remorse.

The Remorse of the Dead

O shadowy Beauty mine, when thou shalt sleep
In the deep heart of a black marble tomb;
When thou for mansion and for bower shalt keep
Only one rainy cave of hollow gloom;

And when the stone upon thy trembling breast,
And on thy straight sweet body's supple grace,
Crushes thy will and keeps thy heart at rest,
And holds those feet from their adventurous race;

Then the deep grave, who shares my reverie,
(For the deep grave is aye the poet's friend)
During long nights when sleep is far from thee,

Shall whisper: "Ah, thou didst not comprehend
The dead wept thus, thou woman frail and weak" -- 
And like remorse the worm shall gnaw thy cheek.

The Cat

Come, superb cat, to my amorous heart;
Hold back the talons of your paws,
Let me gaze into your beautiful eyes
Of metal and agate.

When my fingers leisurely caress you,
Your head and your elastic back,
And when my hand tingles with the pleasure
Of feeling your electric body,

In spirit I see my woman. Her gaze
Like your own, amiable beast,
Profound and cold, cuts and cleaves like a dart,

And, from her head down to her feet,
A subtle air, a dangerous perfume
Floats about her dusky body.

The Cat

Come, my fine cat, against my loving heart; 
Sheathe your sharp claws, and settle. 
And let my eyes into your pupils dart 
Where agate sparks with metal.

Now while my fingertips caress at leisure
Your head and wiry curves,
And that my hand's elated with the pleasure
Of your electric nerves,

I think about my woman -- how her glances 
Like yours, dear beast, deep-down 
And cold, can cut and wound one as with lances;

Then, too, she has that vagrant 
And subtle air of danger that makes fragrant 
Her body, lithe and brown.

The Cat

My beautiful cat, come onto my heart full of love;
Hold back the claws of your paw,
And let me plunge into your adorable eyes
Mixed with metal and agate.

When my fingers lazily fondle
Your head and your elastic back,
And my hand gets drunk with the pleasure
Of feeling your electric body,

I see in spirit my personal lady. Her glance,
Like yours, dear creature,
Deep and cold, slits and splits like a dart,

And from her feet to her head,
A subtle atmosphere, a dangerous perfume,
Swim around her brown body.

The Balcony

Mother of memories, mistress of mistresses,
O you, all my pleasure, O you, all my duty!
You'll remember the sweetness of our caresses,
The peace of the fireside, the charm of the evenings.
Mother of memories, mistress of mistresses!

The evenings lighted by the glow of the coals, 
The evenings on the balcony, veiled with rose mist; 
How soft your breast was to me! how kind was your heart! 
We often said imperishable things, 
The evenings lighted by the glow of the coals.

How splendid the sunsets are on warm evenings!
How deep space is! how potent is the heart!
In bending over you, queen of adored women,
I thought I breathed the perfume in your blood.
How splendid the sunsets are on warm evenings!

The night was growing dense like an encircling wall, 
My eyes in the darkness felt the fire of your gaze 
And I drank in your breath, O sweetness, O poison! 
And your feet nestled soft in my brotherly hands. 
The night was growing dense like an encircling wall.

I know the art of evoking happy moments, 
And live again our past, my head laid on your knees, 
For what's the good of seeking your languid beauty 
Elsewhere than in your dear body and gentle heart? 
I know the art of evoking happy moments.

Those vows, those perfumes, those infinite kisses, 
Will they be reborn from a gulf we may not sound, 
As rejuvenated suns rise in the heavens 
After being bathed in the depths of deep seas?
-- O vows! O perfumes! O infinite kisses!

The Balcony

Mother of memories, queen of paramours, 
Yourself are all my pleasure, all my duty; 
You will recall caresses that were yours 
And fireside evenings in their warmth and beauty. 
Mother of memories, queen of paramours.

On eves illumined by the light of coal, 
The balcony beneath a rose-veiled sky, 
Your breast how soft! Your heart how good and whole! 
We spoke eternal things that cannot die -- 
On eves illumined by the light of coal!

How splendid sets the sun of a warm evening! 
How deep is space! the heart how full of power! 
When, queen of the adored, towards you leaning, 
I breathed the perfume of your blood in flower. 
How splendid sets the sun of a warm evening!

The evening like an alcove seemed to thicken, 
And as my eyes astrologised your own, 
Drinking your breath, I felt sweet poisons quicken, 
And in my hands your feet slept still as stone. 
The evening like an alcove seemed to thicken.

I know how to resuscitate dead minutes. 
I see my past, its face hid in your knees. 
How can I seek your languorous charm save in its 
Own source, your heart and body formed to please. 
I know how to resuscitate dead minutes.

These vows, these perfumes, and these countless kisses, 
Reborn from gulfs that we could never sound, 
Will they, like suns, once bathed in those abysses, 
Rejuvenated from the deep, rebound -- 
These vows, these perfumes, and these countless kisses?

The Balcony

Inspirer of my youth, mistress beyond compare,
You who were all my pleasures, all my hopes and dreams!
Do you recall our cheerful room -- our evenings there,
Quiet and passionate? Like yesterday, it seems,
Inspirer of my youth, mistress beyond compare!

The evenings lighted by the hushed flame of the coal, 
The warm rose-misted twilights in the early springs, 
The balcony! How I adored you, body and soul! 
And, darling, we have said imperishable things 
The evenings lighted by the hushed flame of the coal.

How splendid were the long slow summer sunsets, too!
How large the world appeared to us! How strong and good
Life ran then in our veins! When I leaned close to you
I thought that I could breathe the perfume of your blood.
How splendid were the long slow summer sunsets, too!

The night would close around us like a dim blue wall, 
And your eyes flashed within the darkness, and the sweet 
Drug of your breath came over me. Do you recall 
How I would love to lie for hours holding your feet? 
The night would close around us like a dim blue wall.

I can relive the ecstasy that Time has slain; 
At moments I can feel myself between your thighs. 
What use to hope for anything like that again 
With someone else? What use to seek in any wise? 
I can relive the ecstasy that Time has slain.

Those cries, those long embraces, that remembered scent:
Can they be lost for ever? Will they not come round
Like stars, like suns, to blaze upon the firmament
Of future worlds, from the abyss we cannot sound?
-- O cries! O long embraces! O remembered scent!

The Balcony

Mistress of mistresses, mother of memories, 
O you my every pleasure, you my every duty! 
You shall recall our blandishments and ecstasies, 
The warm peace of our hearth, the evening's placid beauty. 
Mistress of mistresses, mother of memories!

Evenings illumined by the glow of coals afire 
Or on the balcony, veiled in a rosy mist. 
How soft your breast, how kind your heart to my desire! 
We said imperishable things the while we kissed, 
Evenings illumined by the glow of coals afire.

How glorious the sunset on warm summer nights! 
How deep space is! the human heart how competent! 
As I bent over you, queen of my soul's delight, 
I thought I breathed your blood with its suave acrid scent. 
How glorious the sunset on warm summer nights!

The night grew dense, forming a wall to compass us, 
Across the dark your eyes bound mine with golden bands, 
I drank your breath in deep, O sweet, O poisonous! 
Your slender feet slept softly in my gentle hands. 
The night grew dense, forming a wall to compass us.

The resurrection of glad moments is an art 
I know: I live anew, my head pressed to your knees, 
For where, if not in your loved flesh and tender heart,
Can I seek out the wonder of your languidness?
The resurrection of glad moments is an art.

These vows, these fragrant scents, these kisses without end,
Shall they be born again out of infinity?
As suns rejuvenated in the skies ascend,
Having been laved in the unfathomable sea?
-- O vows! O fragrant scents! -- O kisses without end!

The Balcony

Oh, Mother of Memories! Mistress of Mistresses! 
Oh, thou all my pleasures, oh, thou all my prayers! 
Can'st thou remember those luscious caresses, 
The charm of the hearth and the sweet evening airs? 
Oh, Mother of Memories, Mistress of Mistresses! 

Those evenings illumed by the glow of the coal, 
And those roseate nights with their vaporous wings, 
How calm was thy breast and how good was thy soul, 
'Twas then we uttered imperishable things, 
Those evenings illumed by the glow of the coal. 

How lovely the suns on those hot, autumn nights! 
How vast were the heavens! and the heart how hale! 
As I leaned towards you -- oh, my Queen of Delights, 
The scent of thy blood I seemed to inhale. 
How lovely the sun on those hot, autumn nights! 

The shadows of night-time grew dense like a pall, 
And deep through the darkness thine eyes I divined, 
And I drank of thy breath -- oh sweetness, oh gall, 
And thy feet in my brotherly hands reclined, 
The shadows of Night-time grew dense like a pall. 

I know how to call forth those moments so dear, 
And to live my Past -- laid on thy knees -- once more, 
For where should I seek for thy beauties but here 
In thy langorous heart and thy body so pure? 
I know how to call forth those moments so dear. 

Those perfumes, those infinite kisses and sighs, 
Are they born in some gulf to our plummets denied? 
Like rejuvenate suns that mount up to the skies, 
That first have been cleansed in the depths of the tide;
Oh, perfumes! oh, infinite kisses and sighs! 

Le Balcon

mother of memories, mistress of mistresses 
-- thou, all my pleasure, thou, my fealties all!
thou shalt recall each kiss how soft it is,
how warm our hearth, the night how magical,
mother of memories, mistress of mistresses!

long hours illumined by the glowing fire
long balcony-hours veiled with misty rose;
soft pillowing breast! heart warm to my desire!
and all the imperishable things we whispered, those
long hours illumined by the glowing fire

how softly shone the golden, shimmering sun!
how deep the skyey space! how rich love's power!
for bending toward thee, most beloved one,
I seemed to breathe thy pulses like a flower.
how softly shone the golden, shimmering sun!

Night with her thickening wall imprisoned us,
eyes groped for  widening eyes the black withheld,
I drank thy breath, o sweet, o poisonous!
thy feet slept in my hands fraternal held;
Night with her thickening wall imprisoned us.

my magic art evoked a rapture perished,
for in thy clasp I saw my youth afresh,
could others yield the languorous charm I cherished,
thy gentle heart, thy dear and lovely flesh?
my magic art evoked a rapture perished!

but -- vows and fragrance, infinite desire --
shall they arise from gulfs too deep to plumb,
as morn by morn new suns of rosier fire
mount, laved in some dark sea Elysium?
o vows! o fragrance! infinite desire!

The Balcony

Mother of memories, mistress of mistresses,
O thou, my pleasure, thou, all my desire,
Thou shalt recall the beauty of caresses,
The charm of evenings by the gentle fire,
Mother of memories, mistress of mistresses!

The eves illumined by the burning coal,
The balcony where veiled rose-vapour clings -- 
How soft your breast was then, how sweet your soul!
Ah, and we said imperishable things,
Those eves illumined by the burning coal.

Lovely the suns were in those twilights warm,
And space profound, and strong life's pulsing flood,
In bending o'er you, queen of every charm,
I thought I breathed the perfume in your blood.
The suns were beauteous in those twilights warm.

The film of night flowed round and over us,
And my eyes in the dark did your eyes meet;
I drank your breath, ah! sweet and poisonous,
And in my hands fraternal slept your feet -- 
Night, like a film, flowed round and over us.

I can recall those happy days forgot,
And see, with head bowed on your knees, my past.
Your languid beauties now would move me not
Did not your gentle heart and body cast
The old spell of those happy days forgot.

Can vows and perfumes, kisses infinite,
Be reborn from the gulf we cannot sound;
As rise to heaven suns once again made bright
After being plunged in deep seas and profound?
Ah, vows and perfumes, kisses infinite!

<i>I Give You These Verses So That If My Name</i>

I give you these verses so that if my name,
A vessel favored by a strong north wind,
Fortunately reaches the distant future's shore,
And some night sets the minds of men to dreaming,

Your memory, like fables shrouded in the past, 
Will weary the reader like a dulcimer, 
And by a mystical, brotherly bond 
Remain suspended from my haughty verse;

Accurst being to whom, from the deep abysm
To the highest heaven, nothing responds, save me!
-- O you who, like an ephemeral ghost,

Trample lightly and with a serene look
Upon the dull mortals who found you repugnant,
Jet eyed statue, tall angel with a brow of bronze!

<i>For You This Poem: If My Name Should Reach</i>

For you this poem: if my name should reach
Favoured by mighty gales, to far-off times,
Like a proud vessel sailing to the beach,
To stir the brains of humans with my rhymes -- 

Your memory, uncertain as a myth, 
Will tire the reader like an endless gong, 
And be a mystic, kindred chain wherewith 
He'll hang suspended to my towering song:

Curs'd soul to whom (from the supernal sky
To hell's abysm) none responds but I!
O you, who like a fleeting shadow pass,

Spurn with light foot and with serenest gaze 
The stupid mortals who have grudged you praise, 
O jade-eyed statue, angel browed with brass!

<i>Je te donne ces vers afin que si mon nom</i>

these lines to thee, that if my name should come
to some far harbour, on a favouring main,
and ride the gale to Time's Elysium,
with all its freight of dreams to fret the brain,

that thy report, like legends vague and vain,
may tire my reader as a mighty drum,
and linked in mystic union, may become
a symbol married to my haughty strain;

-- accursed one, to whom, from deepest skies
down to the Pit, naught, save my heart, replies!
-- o thou who like a ghost impalpable

tramplest upon, serenely as a bonze
the stupid mortals who denied thy spell
-- cold jet-eyed statue, angel cast in bronze!

All in One

The Demon called on me this morning, 
In my high room. As is his way, 
Thinking to catch me without warning, 
He put this question: "Tell me, pray,

Of all the beauties that compose,
The strange enchantment of her ways,
Amongst the wonders black or rose,
Which object most excites your praise,

And is the climax in her litany?" 
My soul, you answered the Abhorred, 
"Since she is fashioned, all, of dittany, 
No part is most to be adored.

Since I am ravished, I ignore a 
Degree of difference in delight. 
She dazzles me like the aurora 
And she consoles me like the night.

The harmony's so exquisite 
That governs her, it is in vain 
Analysis would try to split 
The unity of such a strain.

O mystic fusion that, enwreathing 
My senses, fuses each in each, 
To hear the music of her breathing 
And breathe the perfume of her speech."

All, All

The Devil up my attic stair
Came tiptoeing a while ago
And, trying to catch me unaware,
Said laughing, "I should like to know,

"Of all her many charms, what springs
Most often to your mind? Of all
The rose-colored and shadowy things
Whereby her beauty may enthrall,

"Which is the sweetest?" -- O my soul, 
You answered the abhorred Guest: 
"Her beauty is complete and whole. 
No single part is loveliest.

"When she is near, I cannot say 
What gives me such intense delight. 
She dazzles like the break of day, 
She comforts like the fall of night.

"My senses seem to merge in one; 
The harmony that rules her being 
Is all my knowledge -- I have none 
Of hearing, smelling, touching, seeing.

"No, no. I cannot make a choice
In this sublime bewilderment.
Perhaps the music of her scent!
Perhaps the perfume of her voice!"

All Entire

The Demon, in my lofty vault, 
This morning came to visit me, 
And striving me to find at fault, 
He said, "Fain would I know of thee;

"Among the many beauteous things, 
All Entire

The Demon, in my lofty vault, 
This morning came to visit me, 
And striving me to find at fault, 
He said, "Fain would I know of thee;

"Among the many beauteous things, 
Tout entiere

this morning, to my chamber bare
and high, the Devil came to call,
and fain to trap me in a snare,
inquired: "I would know, of all

-- of all the beauties that compose
her spell profound, her subtle sway,
-- of all the bits of black or rose
that form her lovely body, say

which is the sweetest?" -- o my soul,
thou didst reply to the Abhorred:
naught can be taken from the whole
for every part is a perfect chord.

when all to me is ravishing,
I know not which gives most delight.
like dawn she is a dazzling thing,
yet she consoles me like the night;

too exquisite the harmonies
that all her lovely flesh affords,
for my poor mind to analyse
and note its many rhythmic chords.

o mystic interchange, whereby
my senses all are blent in one!
her breath is like a lullaby
and through her voice rich perfumes run!

Tout Entiere

This morning in my attic high 
The Demon came to visit me, 
And seeking faults in my reply, 
He said: "I would inquire of thee, 

"Of all the beauties which compose 
Her charming body's potent spell, 
Of all the objects black and rose 
Which make the thing you love so well, 

"Which is the sweetest?" O my soul! 
Thou didst rejoin: "How tell of parts, 
When all I know is that the whole 
Works magic in my heart of hearts? 

"Where all is fair, how should I say 
What single grace is my delight? 
She shines on me like break of day 
And she consoles me as the night. 

"There flows through all her perfect frame 
A harmony too exquisite 
That weak analysis should name 
The numberless accords of it. 

"O mystic metamorphosis! 
My separate senses all are blent; 
Within her breath soft music is, 
And in her voice a subtle scent!"

The Temptation

The Demon, in my chamber high,
This morning came to visit me,
And, thinking he would find some fault,
He whispered: "I would know of thee

Among the many lovely things
That make the magic of her face,
Among the beauties, black and rose,
That make her body's charm and grace,

Which is most fair?" Thou didst reply
To the Abhorred, O soul of mine:
"No single beauty is the best
When she is all one flower divine.

When all things charm me I ignore
Which one alone brings most delight;
She shines before me like the dawn,
And she consoles me like the night.

The harmony is far too great,
That governs all her body fair.
For impotence to analyse
And say which note is sweetest there.

O mystic metamorphosis!
My senses into one sense flow -- 
Her voice makes perfume when she speaks,
Her breath is music faint and low!"

<i>What Will You Say Tonight, Poor Solitary Soul</i>

What will you say tonight, poor solitary soul, 
What will you say, my heart, heart once so withered, 
To the kindest, dearest, the fairest of women, 
Whose divine glance suddenly revived you?

-- We shall try our pride in singing her praises: 
There is nothing sweeter than to do her bidding; 
Her spiritual flesh has the fragrance of Angels, 
And when she looks upon us we are clothed with light.

Be it in the darkness of night, in solitude, 
Or in the city street among the multitude, 
Her image in the air dances like a torch flame.

Sometimes it speaks and says: "I am fair, I command 
That for your love of me you love only Beauty; 
I am your guardian Angel, your Muse and Madonna."

<i>What Can You Say, Poor Lonely Soul of Mine</i>

What can you say, poor lonely soul of mine, 
Or you, poor heart, so long ago turned sour, 
To the best, dearest, loveliest, whose divine 
Regard has made you open like a flower?

We'll set our pride to sing her highest praise 
Naught to her sweet authority compares: 
Her psychic flesh is formed of fragrant airs. 
Her glances clothe us in a suit of rays.

Be it in solitude at dead of night, 
Or in the crowded streets of glaring light, 
Her phantom like a torch before me streams.

It speaks: "I'm beautiful. These orders take.
Love naught but Beauty, always, for my sake,
Madonna, guardian Angel, Muse of dreams."

<i>What Shall You Say Tonight?</i>

What shall you say tonight, poor soul so full of care, 
What shall you say, my heart, heart hitherto so sad, 
To the most kind, to the most dear, to the most fair, 
Whose pure serene regard has made you proud and glad?

-- We shall set all our pride to sing her holy praise!
What sweetness to be hers! To live beneath her sight! 
Half spirit is her flesh, angelic all her ways; 
Her glance alone invests us in a robe of light!

Whether in solitude and deep obscurity, 
Whether by day among the moving crowd it be, 
Her phantom like a torch in air will dance and run;

It speaks: "Beauty is mine; Authority is mine; 
Love only, for my sake, the noble and the fine: 
I am thine Angel, Muse, Madonna, all in one."

Sonnet XLIII

What sayest thou, to-night, poor soul so drear, 
What sayest -- heart erewhile engulfed in gloom, 
To the very lovely, very chaste, and very dear, 
Whose god-like look hath made thee to re-bloom? 

To her, with pride we chant an echoing Hymn, 
For nought can touch the sweetness of her sway;
Her flesh ethereal as the seraphim, 
Her eyes with robe of light our souls array. 

And be it in the night, or solitude, 
Among the streets or 'mid the multitude, 
Her shadow, torch-like, dances in the air, 

And murmurs, "I, the Beautiful proclaim 
That for my sake, alone ye love the Fair;
I am the Guardian Angel, Muse and Dame!"

Sonnet

What wilt thou say, poor lonely soul, to-night? 
What wilt thou say, erst withered heart of mine, 
To the most kind, most beautiful, most bright, 
Who hath renewed thee with her glance divine? 

Put we our pride to singing of her praise! 
Happy the thralls who know her gentle yoke, 
Angelic perfume floats along her ways, 
And she hath clad us in a shining cloak! 

Out in the night and in the solitude 
Out in the street and in the multitude 
Her phantom dances torch-like in the air; 

And sometimes speaks she: "Beauty, thou shalt choose 
Thine only love, for love of me who am fair; 
I am Madonna, Guardian-Angel, Muse!"

The Living Torch

They walk in front of me, those eyes aglow with light 
Which a learned Angel has rendered magnetic; 
They walk, divine brothers who are my brothers too, 
Casting into my eyes diamond scintillations.

They save me from all snares and from all grievous sin; 
They guide my steps along the pathway of Beauty; 
They are my servitors, I am their humble slave; 
My whole being obeys this living torch.

Bewitching eyes, you shine like mystical candles 
That burn in broad daylight; the sun 
Reddens, but does not quench their eerie flame;

While they celebrate Death, you sing the Awakening; 
You walk, singing the awakening of my soul, 
Bright stars whose flame no sun can pale!

The Living Torch

Those lit eyes go before me, in full view, 
(Some cunning angel magnetised their light) -- 
Heavenly twins, yet my own brothers too, 
Shaking their diamond blaze into my sight.

My steps from every trap or sin to save, 
In the strait road of Beauty they conduct me. 
They are my servants, and I am their slave, 
Obedient in whatever they instruct me.

Delightful eyes, you burn with mystic rays 
Like candles in broad day; red suns may blaze, 
But cannot quench their still, fantastic light.

Those candles burn for death, but you for waking: 
You sing the dawn that in my soul is breaking, 
Stars which no sun could ever put to flight!

The Living Torch

They stand before me now, those eyes that shine, 
No doubt inspired by an Angel wise; 
They stand, those God-like brothers that are mine, 
And pour their diamond fires in mine eyes. 

From all transgressions, from all snares, they save, 
Towards the Path of Joy they guide my ways;
They are my servants, and I am their slave;
And all my soul, this living torch obeys. 

Ye charming Eyes -- ye have those mystic beams, 
Of candles, burning in full day; the sun 
Awakes, yet kills not their fantastic gleams: 

Ye sing the Awak'ning, they the dark oblivion;
The Awak'ning of my spirit ye proclaim, 
O stars -- no sun can ever kill your flame! 

Le Flambeau vivant

they march before me, filled with light divine 
-- those eyes turned magnets by some angel wise;
they lead, my Heavenly Twins, good brothers mine,
whose jewelled fires hold my gazing eyes.

they guard from every sin and error grave,
they show my feet the path to Beauty's porch;
they are my servitors and I their slave,
wholly obedient to their heavenly torch.

enchanted eyes, ye have the mystic ray
of tapers lit at noon: the fire of day
reddens, but quenches not their eery glow: --

'tis Death they sing, while ye extol the Morn;
ye point the way and chant a soul reborn
-- stars that no sun can pale nor overthrow!

The Living Flame

They pass before me, these Eyes full of light,
Eyes made magnetic by some angel wise;
The holy brothers pass before my sight,
And cast their diamond fires in my dim eyes.

They keep me from all sin and error grave,
They set me in the path whence Beauty came;
They are my servants, and I am their slave,
And all my soul obeys the living flame.

Beautiful Eyes that gleam with mystic light
As candles lighted at full noon; the sun
Dims not your flame phantastical and bright.

You sing the dawn; they celebrate life done;
Marching you chaunt my soul's awakening hymn,
Stars that no sun has ever made grow dim!

To One Who Is Too Gay

Your head, your bearing, your gestures 
Are fair as a fair countryside; 
Laughter plays on your face 
Like a cool wind in a clear sky.

The gloomy passer-by you meet 
Is dazzled by the glow of health 
Which radiates resplendently 
From your arms and shoulders.

The touches of sonorous color 
That you scatter on your dresses 
Cast into the minds of poets 
The image of a flower dance.

Those crazy frocks are the emblem
Of your multi-colored nature;
Mad woman whom I'm mad about,
I hate and love you equally!

At times in a lovely garden 
Where I dragged my atony, 
I have felt the sun tear my breast, 
As though it were in mockery;

Both the springtime and its verdure 
So mortified my heart 
That I punished a flower 
For the insolence of Nature.

Thus I should like, some night,
When the hour for pleasure sounds,
To creep softly, like a coward,
Toward the treasures of your body,

To whip your joyous flesh
And bruise your pardoned breast,
To make in your astonished flank
A wide and gaping wound,

And, intoxicating sweetness!
Through those new lips,
More bright, more beautiful,
To infuse my venom, my sister!

To One Who Is Too Gay

Your head, your gestures, and your air 
Are lovely as a landscape; smiles 
Rimple upon your face at whiles 
Like winds in the clear sky up there.

The grumpy passers that you graze 
Are dazzled by the radiant health, 
And the illimitable wealth 
Your arms and shoulders seem to blaze.

The glaring colours that, in showers, 
Clash in your clothes with such commotion, 
In poets' minds suggest the notion 
Of a mad ballet-dance of flowers.

These garish dresses illustrate 
Your spirit, striped with every fad. 
O madwoman, whom, quite as mad, 
I love as madly as I hate.

Sometimes in gardens, seeking rest, 
Where I have dragged my soul atonic, 
I've felt the sun with gaze ironic 
Tearing the heart within my breast.

The spring and verdure, dressed to stagger, 
Humiliate me with such power 
That I have punished, in a flower, 
The insolence of Nature's swagger.

And so, one night, I'd like to sneak, 
When night has tolled the hour of pleasure, 
A craven thief, towards the treasure 
Which is your person, plump and sleek.

To punish your bombastic flesh, 
To bruise your breast immune to pain, 
To farrow down your flank a lane 
Of gaping crimson, deep and fresh.

And, most vertiginous delight! 
Into those lips, so freshly striking 
And daily lovelier to my liking -- 
Infuse the venom of my sprite.

A Girl Too Gay

Oh, you are lovely! Every heart 
Surrenders to your sorceries; 
And laughter, like a playful breeze, 
Is always blowing your lips apart.

Your health is radiant, infinite,
Superb: When you go down the street
Each mournful passerby you meet
Is dazzled by the blaze of it!

Your startling dresses, overwrought 
With rainbow hues and sequined showers, 
Bring to a poet's mind the thought 
Of a ballet of drunken flowers.

They are the very symbol of
Your gay and crudely colored soul,
As striped as a barber's pole,
Exuberant thing I hate and love!

Sometimes when wandering, full of gloom,
In a bright garden, I have felt
Horror for all I touched and smelt:
The world outrageously in bloom,

The blinding yellow sun, the spring's 
Raw verdure so rebuked my woes 
That I have punished upon a rose 
The insolence of flowering things.

Likewise, some evening, I would creep,
When midnight sounds, and everywhere
The sighing of lovers fills the air,
To the hushed alcove where you sleep,

And waken you by violent storm,
And beat you coldly till you swooned,
And carve upon your perfect form,
With care, a deep seductive wound -- 

And (joy delirious and complete!) 
Through those bright novel lips, through this 
Gaudy and virgin orifice, 
Infuse you with my venom, sweet.

A Celle Qui Est Trop Gaie

Your head, your stance, your airy grace 
Are as a landscape in July, 
Blithe laughter plays upon your face 
Like a cool wind in a clear sky.

The sorry passerby you sight 
Is dazzled by the glowing charms 
That issue in a radiant light 
Over your shoulders and your arms. 

Over your blaring frocks we find 
Wild colors strewn with elegance 
That rouse within the poet's mind 
The image of a flower dance. 

Your crazy gowns are emblems of 
Your own variegated state, 
Madwoman, whom I madly love 
And whom I quite as madly hate. 

At times in gardens where, oppressed, 
I dragged my stubborn atony, 
I felt gold sunlight rend my breast 
As if in bitter raillery. 

Both springtime and its verdant bowers 
So mortified my heart and sense 
That I chastised the budding flowers 
Because of Nature's insolence. 

Thus I should like some night, when deep 
The hour tolls out for hidden pleasures, 
Softly and cravenly to creep 
Close to your body's lavish treasures.

(Last two stanzas cut off -- censored? -- in original publication.)

To Her Who Is Too Gay

Your head, your gesture, your air
Are beautiful as a beautiful landscape; 
The smile plays in your face 
Like a fresh wind in a clear sky.

The fleeting care that you brush against 
Is dazzled by the health 
Which leaps like clarity 
From your arms and your shoulders.

The re-echoing colors 
Which you scatter in your toilet 
Cast in the hearts of poets 
The image of a ballet of flowers.

These silly clothes are the emblem
Of your many-colored spirit;
Silly woman of my infatuation,
I hate as much as love you!

Sometimes in a pretty garden 
Where I dragged my weakness, 
I have felt the sun like irony 
Tear my chest;

And the spring and the green of things 
Have so humbled my heart, 
That I have punished a flower 
For the insolence of Nature.

Thus I would wish, one night,
When the voluptuary's hour sounds,
To crawl like a coward, noiselessly,
Towards the treasures of your body,

In order to correct your gay flesh
And beat your unbegrudging breast,
To make upon your starting thigh
A long and biting weal,

And, sweet giddiness,
Along those newly-gaping lips
More vivid and more beautiful,
Inject my venom, O my sister!

Reversibility

Angel full of gaiety, do you know anguish, 
Shame, remorse, sobs, vexations, 
And the vague terrors of those frightful nights 
That compress the heart like a paper one crumples? 
Angel full of gaiety, do you know anguish?

Angel full of kindness, do you know hatred, 
The clenched fists in the darkness and the tears of gall, 
When Vengeance beats out his hellish call to arms, 
And makes himself the captain of our faculties? 
Angel full of kindness, do you know hatred?

Angel full of health, do you know Fever, 
Walking like an exile, moving with dragging steps, 
Along the high, wan walls of the charity ward, 
And with muttering lips seeking the rare sunlight? 
Angel full of health, do you know Fever?

Angel full of beauty, do you know wrinkles, 
The fear of growing old, and the hideous torment 
Of reading in the eyes of her he once adored 
Horror at seeing love turning to devotion? 
Angel full of beauty, do you know wrinkles?

Angel full of happiness, of joy and of light,
David on his death-bed would have appealed for health
To the emanations of your enchanted flesh;
But of you, angel, I beg only prayers,
Angel full of happiness, of joy and of light!

Reversibility

Angel of gaiety, have you known anguish, 
Shame and remorse, tears, boredom, and dismay, 
Vague horrors of the nights in which we languish, 
Which crumple hearts like papers thrown away? 
Angel of gaiety, have you known anguish?

Angel of kindness, have you met with hate? 
Fists clenched in gloom, eyes running tears of gall, 
When Vengeance beats his drum to subjugate 
Our faculties, the captain of them all? 
Angel of kindness, have you met with hate?

Angel of health, have you beheld the Fevers? 
Across pale walls of wards they limp and stumble, 
Like exiles wan, with agues, chills, and shivers, 
Seeking the scanty sun with lips that mumble. 
Angel of health, have you beheld the Fevers?

Angel of beauty, do you know Old Age, 
The fear of wrinkles, and the dire emotion, 
In eyes we've pierced too long, as on a page, 
To read the secret horror of devotion? 
Angel of beauty do you know Old Age?

Angel of goodness, radiance, and delight, 
The dying David would have begged to share 
The emanations of your body bright. 
But all I wish to ask of you is prayer, 
Angel of goodness, radiance, and delight.

The Angelic One

Spirit of happiness, hast thou heard tell of woe? 
Hast thou heard tell of anguish, and remorse, and care -- 
Of those long nights when in the black fist of Despair 
The heart is crumpled up like paper? Dost thou know, 
Spirit of happiness? Hast thou heard tell of woe?

Spirit of kindliness, hast thou heard tell of hate, 
The clenched hands in the darkness, the silent bitter tears, 
With Vengeance beating in the arteries of our ears 
Its dogged tom-tom, irresistible as fate? 
Spirit of kindliness, hast thou heard tell of hate?

Spirit of health, hast thou heard whisper of Disease, 
Whose pallid children, in the courtyard gray with soot 
Of the bleak hospital, go dragging a slow foot 
To find a patch of sunlight? Host thou heard of these? 
Spirit of health, hast thou heard whisper of Disease?

Spirit of beauty, hast thou heard of ugliness, 
Of the long secret torment of growing old -- above 
All else, the pain of reading in the eyes we love 
A wordless horror, even while the lips say "yes?" 
Spirit of beauty, hast thou heard of ugliness?

Spirit of joy, spirit of beauty, spirit of light, 
David, grown old, would have thought nothing to implore 
Thy healing touch, thy warm young presence in the night; 
But, spirit, I only ask of thee thy prayers, no more -- 
Spirit of joy, spirit of beauty, spirit of light!

Reversibility

Angel, teeming with gaiety, do you know grief,
Anguish, remorse and shame, their ravages and blights,
And the vague terrors of those panic-stricken nights
Which squeeze the heartstrings dry as a sere crumpled leaf?
Angel, teeming with gaiety, do you know grief?

Angel, teeming with kindliness, do you know hate, 
Fists tight-clenched in the shadows, scalding tears of gall, 
When Vengeance roars with his infernal battle-call, 
Making himself the captain of our acts and fate? 
Angel, teeming with kindliness, do you know hate?

Angel, teeming with healthfulness, do you know Fever 
Who like an exile lopes with dragging step towards 
The wan stark walls of hospitals and public wards, 
Mumbling, seeking rare sunlight for a brace or lever? 
Angel, teeming with healthfulness, do you know Fever?

Angel, teeming with loveliness, do you know wrinkles, 
The fear of growing old, and, like a poisoned potion, 
The dread of seeing love turn into fond devotion 
In eyes adored, once blue and pure as periwinkles? 
Angel, teeming with loveliness, do you know wrinkles?

Angel, teeming with happy, blithe, luminous airs, 
David upon his deathbed would have craved for power 
From the suave emanations of your body's flower, 
But I, angel, beseech of you only your prayers, 
Angel, teeming with happy, blithe, luminous airs!

Reversibility

Angel of gaiety, have you tasted grief?
Shame and remorse and sobs and weary spite,
And the vague terrors of the fearful night
That crush the heart up like a crumpled leaf?
Angel of gaiety, have you tasted grief?

Angel of kindness, have you tasted hate?
With hands clenched in the shade and tears of gall,
When Vengeance beats her hellish battle-call,
And makes herself the captain of our fate,
Angel of kindness, have you tasted hate?

Angel of health, did ever you know pain,
Which like an exile trails his tired footfalls
The cold length of the white infirmary walls,
With lips compressed, seeking the sun in vain?
Angel of health, did ever you know pain?

Angel of beauty, do you wrinkles know?
Know you the fear of age, the torment vile
Of reading secret horror in the smile
Of eyes your eyes have loved since long ago?
Angel of beauty, do you crinkles know?

Angel of happiness, and joy, and light,
Old David would have asked for youth afresh
From the pure touch of your enchanted flesh;
I but implore your prayers to aid my plight,
Angel of happiness, and joy, and light.

Confession

One time, once only, sweet, amiable woman,
On my arm your smooth arm
Rested (on the tenebrous background of my soul 
That memory is not faded);

It was late; like a newly struck medal 
The full moon spread its rays,
And the solemnity of the night streamed 
Like a river over sleeping Paris.

And along the houses, under the porte-cocheres, 
Cats passed by furtively,
With ears pricked up, or else, like beloved shades, 
Slowly escorted us.

Suddenly, in the midst of that frank intimacy 
Born in the pale moonlight,
From you, sonorous, rich instrument which vibrates 
Only with radiant gaiety,

From you, clear and joyful as a fanfare
In the glistening morning light,
A plaintive note, a bizarre note
Escaped, faltering

Like a puny, filthy, sullen, horrible child,
Who would make his family blush,
And whom they have hidden for a long time
In a secret cellar.

Poor angel, it sang, your discordant note:
"That naught is certain here below,
That always, though it paint its face with utmost care
Man's selfishness reveals itself,

That it's a hard calling to be a lovely woman,
And that it is the banal task
Of the cold and silly danseuse who faints away
With a mechanical smile,

That to build on hearts is a foolish thing,
That all things break, love, and beauty,
Till Oblivion tosses them into his dosser
To give them back to Eternity!"

I've often evoked that enchanted moon,
The silence and the languidness,
And that horrible confidence whispered
In the heart's confessional.

Confession

Once, and once only, kind and gentle lady, 
Your polished arm on mine you placed 
(Deep down within my spirit, dark and shady, 
I keep the memory uneffaced).

A medal, newly-coined, of flashing silver, 
The full moon shone. The night was old. 
Its solemn grandeur, like a mighty river, 
Through sleeping Paris softly rolled.

Along the streets, by courtyard doors, cats darted 
And passed in furtive, noiseless flight 
With cars pricked; or, like shades of friends departed, 
Followed us slowly through the night.

Cutting this easy intimacy through, 
That hatched from out that pearly light --  
O rich resounding instrument, from you, 
Who'd always thrilled with loud delight,

From you, till then as joyful as a peal 
Of trumpets on a sparkling morn, 
A cry so plaintive that it seemed unreal, 
Was staggeringly torn.

Like some misborn, deformed, and monstrous kid 
Who puts his family to the blush, 
Whose presence in a cellar must be hid 
And his existence in a hush!

Poor angel! that harsh note was meant to sing 
"That nothing in this world is certain, 
And human egotism is the thing 
Which all existence serves to curtain.

That it's an irksome task to be a beauty, 
A boring job one has to face -- 
Like frigid dancers, smiling as a duty 
With hard, mechanical grimace:

That building upon hearts is idiotic: 
All cracks, love, beauty, and fraternity 
Until Oblivion puts them in his pocket 
To pawn them on to old Eternity!"

I often have recalled that moon of magic, 
That languid hush on quays and marts, 
And then this confidence, so grim and tragic, 
In the confessional of hearts.

The Confession

Once, only once, beloved and gentle lady,
Upon my arm you leaned your arm of snow,
And on my spirit's background, dim and shady,
That memory flashes now.

The hour was late, and like a medal gleaming
The full moon showed her face,
And the night's splendour over Paris streaming
Filled every silent place.

Along the houses, in the doorways hiding,
Cats passed with stealthy tread
And listening ear, or followed, slowly gliding,
Like ghosts of dear ones dead.

Sudden, amid our frank and free relation,
Born of that limpid light,
From you, rich instrument, whose sole vibration
Was radiancy and light -- 

From you, joyous as bugle-call resounding
Across the woods at morn,
With sharp and faltering accent, strangely sounding,
Escaped one note forlorn.

Like some misshapen infant, dark, neglected,
Its kindred blush to own,
And long have hidden, by no eye detected,
In some dim cave unknown.

Your clashing note cried clear, poor, prisoned spirit,
That nothing in the world is sure or fast,
And that man's selfishness, though decked as merit,
Betrays itself at last.

That hard the lot to be a queen of beauty,
And all is fruitless, like the treadmill toil
Of some paid dancer, fainting at her duty,
Still with her vacant smile.

That if one build on hearts, ill shall befall it,
That all things crack, and love and beauty flee,
Until oblivion flings them in his wallet,
Spoil of eternity.

Oft have I called to mind that night enchanted,
The silence and the languor over all,
And that wild confidence, thus harshly chanted,
At the heart's confessional.

Spiritual Dawn

When debauchees are roused by the white, rosy dawn, 
Escorted by the Ideal which gnaws at their hearts 
Through the action of a mysterious, vengeful law, 
In the somnolent brute an Angel awakens.

The inaccessible blue of Spiritual Heavens, 
For the man thrown to earth who suffers and still dreams, 
Opens and yawns with the lure of the abyss. 
Thus, dear Goddess, Being, lucid and pure,

Over the smoking ruins of stupid orgies, 
Your memory, clearer, more rosy, more charming, 
Hovers incessantly before my widened eyes.

The sunlight has darkened the flame of the candles; 
Thus, ever triumphant, resplendent soul! 
Your phantom is like the immortal sun!

Spiritual Dawn

When in the company of the Ideal 
(That gnawing tooth) Dawn enters, white and pink, 
The rooms of rakes -- each sated beast can feel 
An Angel waking through the fumes of drink.

For downcast Man, who dreams and suffers still, 
The azure of the mystic heaven above, 
With gulf-like vertigo, attracts his will. 
So, Goddess, lucid Being of pure love,

Over the smoking wreck of feasts and scandals, 
Your phantom, rosy and enchanting, flies 
And still returns to my dilated eyes.

The sun has blackened out the flame of candles. 
So your victorious phantom seems as one, 
O blazing spirit, with the deathless Sun!

The Spiritual Dawn

When on some wallowing soul the roseate East
Dawns with the Ideal that awakes and gnaws,
By vengeful working of mysterious laws
An angel rises in the drowsed beast.

The inaccessible blue of the soul-sphere
To him whose grovelling dream remorse doth gall
Yawns wide as when the gulfs of space enthral.
So, heavenly Goddess, Spirit pure and clear,

Even on the reeking ruins of vile shame
Thy rosy vision, beautiful and bright,
For ever floats on my enlargëd sight.

Thus sunlight blackens the pale taper-flame;
And thus is thy victorious phantom one,
O soul of splendour, with the immortal Sun!

The Spiritual Dawn

When the morning white and rosy breaks, 
With the gnawing Ideal, upon the debauchee, 
By the power of a strange decree, 
Within the sotted beast an Angel wakes. 

The mental Heaven's inaccessible blue, 
For wearied mortals that still dream and mourn, 
Expands and sinks; towards the chasm drawn. 
Thus, cherished goddess, Being pure and true -- 

Upon the rests of foolish orgy-nights 
Thine image, more sublime, more pink, more clear, 
Before my staring eyes is ever there. 

The sun has darkened all the candle lights;
And thus thy spectre like the immortal sun, 
Is ever victorious -- thou resplendent one! 

L'Aube spirituelle

when to the drunkard's room the flushing East
comes with her comrade sharply-clawed, the Dream,
she wakens, by a dark avenging scheme,
an angel in the dull besotted beast.

deep vaults of inaccessible azure there,
before the dreamer sick with many a phasm,
open, abysmal as a beckoning chasm.
thus, deity, all pure clear light and air,

over the stupid orgy's reeking track
-- brighter and lovelier yet, thine image flies
in fluttering rays before my widening eyes.

the sun has turned the candles' flame to black;
even so, victorious always, thou art one
-- resplendent spirit! -- with the eternal sun!

The Spiritual Dawn

When upon revellers the stained dawn breaks 
The fierce ideal comes with it; at that hour, 
Stirred by some terrible avenging power, 
An angel in the sated brute awakes. 

Above the stricken, suffering man there glow 
Far azure plains of unimagined bliss 
Which draw his dreaming spirit like the abyss. 
O pure, beloved Goddess, even so 

O'er the smoked wrecks of stupid scenes of shame 
Brighter and rosier thy sweet memory 
Hovers before my wide eyes hauntingly...

The Sun has dimmed and charred the candles' flame, 
And thus, my glorious all-conquering one, 
Thy shade is peer to the immortal Sun. 

Evening Harmony

The season is at hand when swaying on its stem 
Every flower exhales perfume like a censer; 
Sounds and perfumes turn in the evening air; 
Melancholy waltz and languid vertigo!

Every flower exhales perfume like a censer; 
The violin quivers like a tormented heart; 
Melancholy waltz and languid vertigo! 
The sky is sad and beautiful like an immense altar.

The violin quivers like a tormented heart,
A tender heart, that hates the vast, black void!
The sky is sad and beautiful like an immense altar;
The sun has drowned in his blood which congeals...

A tender heart that hates the vast, black void
Gathers up every shred of the luminous past! 
The sun has drowned in his blood which congeals...
Your memory in me glitters like a monstrance!

Evening Harmony

Now comes the eve, when on its stem vibrates
Each flower, evaporating like a censer;
When sounds and scents in the dark air grow denser;
Drowsed swoon through which a mournful waltz pulsates!

Each flower evaporates as from a censer; 
The fiddle like a hurt heart palpitates; 
Drowsed swoon through which a mournful waltz pulsates;
The sad, grand sky grows, altar-like, immenser.

The fiddle, like a hurt heart, palpitates,
A heart that hates oblivion, ruthless censor.
The sad, grand sky grows, altar-like, immenser.
The sun in its own blood coagulates...

A heart that hates oblivion, ruthless censor,
The whole of the bright past resuscitates.
The sun in its own blood coagulates...
And, monstrance-like, your memory flames intenser!

Evening Harmony

Now comes the time when quivering on its stem
Each flower exhales like a censer;
Sounds and perfumes turn in the evening air;
Melancholy waltz and languorous vertigo!

Each flower exhales like a censer;
The violin sobs like an afflicted heart;
Melancholy waltz and languorous vertigo!
The sky is as sad and beautiful as a great altar of rest.

The violin sobs like an afflicted heart,
A tender heart, which hates the huge black void!
The sky is as sad and beautiful as a great altar of rest.
The sun drowned in its blood which coagulates.

A tender heart, which hates the huge black void,
Welcomes every vestige of a luminous past!
The sun drowned in its blood which coagulates…
Your memory shines in me like a monstrance!

Evening Harmony

The hour approacheth, when, as their stems incline, 
The flowers evaporate like an incense urn, 
And sounds and scents in the vesper breezes turn;
A melancholy waltz -- and a drowsiness divine. 

The flowers evaporate like an incense urn, 
The viol vibrates like the wailing of souls that repine. 
A melancholy waltz -- and a drowsiness divine, 
The skies like a mosque are beautiful and stern. 

The viol vibrates like the wailing of souls that repine;
Sweet souls that shrink from chaos vast and etern, 
The skies like a mosque are beautiful and stern, 
The sunset drowns within its blood-red brine. 

Sweet souls that shrink from chaos vast and etern, 
Essay the wreaths of their faded Past to entwine, 
The sunset drowns within its blood-red brine, 
Thy thought within me glows like an incense urn. 

Harmonie du soir

the hours approach when vibrant in the breeze,
a censer swoons to every swaying flower;
blown tunes and scents in turn enchant the bower;
languorous waltz of swirling fancies these!

a censer swoons in every swaying flower;
the quivering violins cry out, decrease;
languorous waltz of swirling fancies these!
mournful and fair the heavenly altars tower.

the quivering violins cry out, decrease;
like hearts of love the Void must overpower!
mournful and fair the heavenly altars tower.
the drowned sun bleeds in fast congealing seas.

a heart of love the Void must overpower
peers for a vanished day's last vestiges!
the drowned sun bleeds in fast congealing seas...
and like a Host thy flaming memories flower!

Evening Harmony

Now is the time when trembling on its stem
Each flower fades away like incense;
Sounds and scents turn in the evening air;
A melancholy waltz, a soft and giddy dizziness!

Each flower fades away like incense; 
The violin thrills like a tortured heart; 
A melancholy waltz, a soft and giddy dizziness! 
The sky is sad and beautiful like some great resting-place.

The violin thrills like a tortured heart, 
A tender heart, hating the wide black void. 
The sky is sad and beautiful like some great resting-place; 
The sun drowns itself in its own clotting blood.

A tender heart, boring the wide black void,
Gathers all trace from the pellucid past.
The sun drowns itself in clotting blood.
Like the Host shines O your memory in me!

The Perfume Flask

There are strong perfumes for which all matter
Is porous. One would say they go through glass.
On opening a coffer that has come from the East,
Whose creaking lock resists and grates,

Or in a deserted house, some cabinet 
Full of the Past's acrid odor, dusty and black, 
Sometimes one finds an antique phial which remembers, 
Whence gushes forth a living soul returned to life.

Many thoughts were sleeping, death-like chrysalides, 
Quivering softly in the heavy shadows, 
That free their wings and rise in flight, 
Tinged with azure, glazed with rose, spangled with gold.

That is the bewitching souvenir which flutters 
In the troubled air; the eyes close; Dizziness 
Seizes the vanquished soul, pushes it with both hands 
Toward a darkened abyss of human pollution:

He throws it down at the edge of an ancient abyss, 
Where, like stinking Lazarus tearing wide his shroud, 
There moves as it wakes up, the ghostly cadaver 
Of a rancid old love, charming and sepulchral.

Thus, when I'll be lost to the memory
Of men, when I shall be tossed into the corner
Of a dismal wardrobe, a desolate old phial,
Decrepit, cracked, slimy, dirty, dusty, abject,

Delightful pestilence! I shall be your coffin,
The witness of your strength and of your virulence,
Beloved poison prepared by the angels! Liqueur
That consumes me, O the life and death of my heart!

The Flask

Perfumes there are which through all things can pass
And make all matter porous, even glass;
Old coffers from the Orient brought, whose locks
Grind sullenly when opening the box,

Or, in an empty house, some ancient chest, 
Where time and dust and gloom were long compressed, 
May yield a flask where memory survives, 
And a soul flashes into future lives.

A thousand thoughts, funereal larvae, laid 
Shuddering softly under palls of shade, 
May suddenly their soaring wings unfold, 
Stained azure, glazed with rose, or filmed with gold.

Intoxicating memory now flies 
Into the dusk, and makes us close our eyes: 
Vertigo draws the spirit which it grips 
Towards some dark miasma of eclipse:

Beside an ancient pit he makes her fall, 
Where Lazarus, sweet-scented, tears his pall 
And wakes the spectral corpse of some now-cold, 
Rancid, sepulchral love he knew of old.

So when I'm lost to human memory, thrown
In some old gloomy chest to fie alone,
A poor decrepit flask, cracked, abject, crusty
With dirt, opaque and sticky, damp and dusty,

I'll be your pall and shroud, beloved pest! 
The witness of your venom, and its test, 
Dear poison, angel-brewed with deadly art -- 
Life, death, and dear corrosion of my heart.

The Perfume Flask

All matter becomes porous to certain scents; they pass
Through everything; it seems they even go through glass.
When opening some old trunk brought home from the far east,
That scolds, feeling the key turned and the lid released -- 

Some wardrobe, in a house long uninhabited, 
Full of the powdery odors of moments that are dead -- 
At times, distinct as ever, an old flask will emit 
Its perfume; and a soul comes back to live in it.

Dormant as chrysalides, a thousand thoughts that lie 
In the thick shadows, pulsing imperceptibly, 
Now stir, now struggle forth; now their cramped wings unfold, 
Tinted with azure, lustred with rose, sheeted with gold!

Oh, memories, how you rise and soar, and hover there!
The eyes close; dizziness, in the moth-darkened air,
Seizes the drunken soul, and thrusts it toward the verge -- 
Where mistily all human miasmas float and merge -- 

Of a primeval gulf; and drops it to the ground, 
There, where, like Lazarus rising, his grave-clothes half unwound, 
And odorous, a cadaver from its sleep has stirred: 
An old and rancid love, charming and long-interred.

Thus, when I shall be lost from sight, thus when all men
Forget me, in the dark and dusty corner then
Of that most sinister cupboard where the living pile
The dead -- when, an old flask, cracked, sticky, abject, vile,

I lie at length -- still, still, sweet pestilence of my heart, 
As to what power thou hast, how virulent thou art, 
I shall bear witness; safe shall thy dear poison be! 
Thou vitriol of the gods! thou death and life of me!

Le Flacon

so keen some fragrances, they freely pass
all barriers. they would pierce a wall of glass.
unlatch a coffer from the Orient
whose creaking hinge will scarcely grant consent,

or cupboard in an empty house, where murk,
sharp smells and cobwebs of a century lurk,
thou'lt find perhaps a flask that holds a host
of memories, free perchance a living ghost.

crushed in the gloom a thousand keepsakes lay
like coffined larvae there, which, quivering, grey,
released at last arise on soaring wing,
rose-flushed or azure, golden, glittering,

and swirling memories mount, to thrill and tease
our closing eyes; we reel in murk, as these
grapple amain and hurl the quailing soul
down to a Pit where human odours roll

and fell it on the brink that waits for all,
where, bursting, Lazarus-like, its rotted pall,
stirs and awakes the spectral visage of
a charming, fusty, weird, forgotten love.

so when Oblivion blots my memory dim,
and in a corner of a cupboard grim
I like cast off, a sorry flask and old,
crackled and dusty, viscous, green with mould,

I'll be thy coffin, lovely pestilence!
I'll prove thy power and thy virulence,
dear poison brewed by angels! dulcet fire
I've drunk, my life, my death, my heart's desire!

The Flask

There are some powerful odours that can pass
Out of the stoppered flagon; even glass
To them is porous. Oft when some old box
Brought from the East is opened and the locks
And hinges creak and cry; or in a press
In some deserted house, where the sharp stress
Of odours old and dusty fills the brain;
An ancient flask is brought to light again,
And forth the ghosts of long-dead odours creep.
There, softly trembling in the shadows, sleep
A thousand thoughts, funereal chrysalides,
Phantoms of old the folding darkness hides,
Who make faint flutterings as their wings unfold,
Rose-washed and azure-tinted, shot with gold.

A memory that brings languor flutters here:
The fainting eyelids droop, and giddy Fear
Thrusts with both hands the soul towards the pit
Where, like a Lazarus from his winding-sheet,
Arises from the gulf of sleep a ghost
Of an old passion, long since loved and lost.
So I, when vanished from man's memory
Deep in some dark and sombre chest I lie,
An empty flagon they have cast aside,
Broken and soiled, the dust upon my pride,
Will be your shroud, beloved pestilence!
The witness of your might and virulence,
Sweet poison mixed by angels; bitter cup
Of life and death my heart has drunken up!

Poison

Wine knows how to adorn the most sordid hovel
With marvelous luxury
And make more than one fabulous portal appear
In the gold of its red mist
Like a sun setting in a cloudy sky.

Opium magnifies that which is limitless,
Lengthens the unlimited,
Makes time deeper, hollows out voluptuousness,
And with dark, gloomy pleasures
Fills the soul beyond its capacity.

All that is not equal to the poison which flows
From your eyes, from your green eyes,
Lakes where my soul trembles and sees its evil side...
My dreams come in multitude
To slake their thirst in those bitter gulfs.

All that is not equal to the awful wonder
Of your biting saliva,
Charged with madness, that plunges my remorseless soul
Into oblivion
And rolls it in a swoon to the shores of death.

Poisons

Wine can conceal a sordid room
In rich, miraculous disguise, 
And make such porticoes arise
Out of its flushed and crimson fume 
As makes the sunset in the skies.

Opium the infinite enlarges,
And lengthens all that is past measure. 
It deepens time, and digs its treasure,
With sad, black raptures it o'ercharges 
The soul, and surfeits it with pleasure.

Neither are worth the drug so strong
That you distil from your green eyes, 
Lakes where I see my soul capsize
Head downwards: and where, in one throng, 
I slake my dreams, and quench my sighs.

But to your spittle these seem naught -- 
It stings and burns. It steeps my thought 
And spirit in oblivious gloom,
And, in its dizzy onrush caught, 
Dashes it on the shores of doom.

Le Poison

wine clothes the sordid walls of hovels old
with pomp no palace knows,
evokes long peristyles in pillared rows
from vaporous red and gold;
like sunset with her cloud-built porticoes.

and opium widens all that has no bourn
in its unbounded sea;
moments grow hours, pleasures cease to be
in souls that, overworn, 
drown in its black abyss of lethargy.

dread poisons, but more dread the poisoned well
of thy green eyes accurst;
tarns where I watch my trembling soul, reversed
my dreams innumerable
throng to those bitter gulfs to slake their thirst.

dread magic, but thy mouth more dread than these:
its wine and hellebore
burn, floods of Lethe, in my bosom's core,
till winds of madness seize
and dash me swooning on Death's barren shore!

Cloudy Sky

One would say that your gaze was veiled with mist; 
Your mysterious eyes (are they blue, gray or green?) 
Alternately tender, dreamy, cruel, 
Reflect the indolence and pallor of the sky.

You call to mind those days, white, soft, and mild, 
That make enchanted hearts burst into tears, 
When, shaken by a mysterious, wracking pain, 
The nerves, too wide-awake, jeer at the sleeping mind.

You resemble at times those gorgeous horizons
That the sun sets ablaze in the seasons of mist...
How resplendent you are, landscape drenched with rain,
Aflame with rays that fall from a cloudy sky!

O dangerous woman, O alluring climates! 
Will I also adore your snow and your hoar-frost, 
And can I draw from your implacable winter 
Pleasures keener than iron or ice?

Misty Sky

One would have thought your eyes were veiled in haze 
Strange eyes! (Grey, green, or azure is their gaze?) 
It seems they would reflect, in each renewal, 
The changing skies, dull, dreamy, fond, or cruel.

You know those days both warm and hazy, which 
Melt into tears the hearts that they bewitch: 
And when the nerves, uneasy to control, 
Too-wide awake, upbraid the sleeping soul.

You, too, resemble such a lit horizon 
As suns of misty seasons now bedizen...
As you shine out, a landscape fresh with rain 
With misty sunbeams sparkling on the plain.

Dangerous girl, seductive as the weather! 
Shall I adore your snows and frosts together? 
In your relentless winter shall I feel 
A kiss more sharp than that of ice and steel?

Overcast Sky

Meseemeth thy glance, soft enshrouded with dew, 
Thy mysterious eyes (are they grey, green or blue?), 
Alternately cruel, and tender, and shy, 
Reflect both the languor and calm of the sky. 

Thou recallest those white days -- with shadows caressed, 
Engendering tears from th' enraptured breast, 
When racked by an anguish unfathomed that weeps, 
The nerves, too awake, jibe the spirit that sleeps. 

At times -- thou art like those horizons divine, 
Where the suns of the nebulous seasons decline;
How resplendent art thou -- O pasturage vast, 
Illumed by the beams of a sky overcast! 

O! dangerous dame -- oh seductive clime! 
As well, will I love both thy snow and thy rime, 
And shall I know how from the frosts to entice 
Delights that are keener than iron and ice? 

Ciel brouille

thine eyes are veiled with vapour opaline;
-- those eyes of mystery! -- (azure, grey or green?)
cruel or soft in turn as dreams devise,
reflect the languor of the pallid skies.

thou'rt like these autumn days of silver-grey
whose magic melts the soul to tears: a day
when by a secret evil inly torn
the quivering nerves laugh drowsy wits to scorn.

thou art as fair as distant dales, where suns
of misty seasons leave their benisons...
how dazzling rich the dewy woodlands lie
flaming in sunlight from a ruffled sky!

o fateful woman! sky that lures and lours!
and shall I love thy snow, its frosty hours,
and learn to clutch from winter's iron gyves
new pleasure keen as cloven ice or knives?

The Cat

I

In my brain there walks about,
As though he were in his own home,
A lovely cat, strong, sweet, charming.
When he mews, one scarcely hears him,

His tone is so discreet and soft; 
But purring or growling, his voice 
Is always deep and rich; 
That is his charm and secret.

That voice forms into drops, trickles 
Into the depths of my being, 
Fills me like harmonious verse 
And gladdens me like a philtre.

It lulls to sleep the sharpest pains,
Contains all ecstasies;
To say the longest sentences,
It has no need of words,

No, there's no bow that plays upon
My heart, that perfect instrument,
And makes its most vibrant chord
Sing more gloriously

Than your voice, mysterious cat, 
Seraphic cat, singular cat, 
In whom, as in angels, all is 
As subtle as harmonious!

II

From his brown and yellow fur 
Comes such sweet fragrance that one night 
I was perfumed with it because 
I caressed him once, once only.

A familiar figure in the place, 
He presides, judges, inspires 
Everything within his province; 
Perhaps he is a fay, a god?

When my gaze, drawn as by a magnet,
Turns in a docile way
Toward that cat whom I love,
And when I look within myself,

I see with amazement 
The fire of his pale pupils, 
Clear signal-lights, living opals, 
That contemplate me fixedly.

The Cat

I

A fine strong gentle cat is prowling 
As in his bedroom, in my brain; 
So soft his voice, so smooth its strain, 
That you can scarcely hear him miowling.

But should he venture to complain 
Or scold, the voice is rich and deep: 
And thus he manages to keep 
The charm of his untroubled reign.

This voice, which seems to pearl and filter 
Through my soul's inmost shady nook, 
Fills me with poems, like a book, 
And fortifies me, like a philtre.

His voice can cure the direst pain 
And it contains the rarest raptures. 
The deepest meanings, which it captures, 
It needs no language to explain.

There is no bow that can so sweep
That perfect instrument, my heart:
Or make more sumptuous music start
From its most vibrant cord and deep,

Than can the voice of this strange elf,
This cat, bewitching and seraphic,
Subtly harmonious in his traffic
With all things else, and with himself.

II

So sweet a perfume seems to swim 
Out of his fur both brown and bright, 
I nearly was embalmed one night 
From (only once) caressing him.

Familiar Lar of where I stay, 
He rules, presides, inspires and teaches 
All things to which his empire reaches. 
Perhaps he is a god, or fay.

When to a cherished cat my gaze
Is magnet-drawn and then returns
Back to itself, it there discerns,
With strange excitement and amaze,

Deep down in my own self, the rays 
Of living opals, torch-like gleams 
And pallid fire of eyes, it seems, 
That fixedly return my gaze.

The Cat

I

A fine strong gentle cat is prowling 
As in his bedroom, in my brain; 
So soft his voice, so smooth its strain, 
That you can scarcely hear him miowling.

But should he venture to complain 
Or scold, the voice is rich and deep: 
And thus he manages to keep 
The charm of his untroubled reign.

This voice, which seems to pearl and filter 
Through my soul's inmost shady nook, 
Fills me with poems, like a book, 
And fortifies me, like a philtre.

His voice can cure the direst pain 
And it contains the rarest raptures. 
The deepest meanings, which it captures, 
It needs no language to explain.

There is no bow that can so sweep
That perfect instrument, my heart:
Or make more sumptuous music start
From its most vibrant cord and deep,

Than can the voice of this strange elf,
This cat, bewitching and seraphic,
Subtly harmonious in his traffic
With all things else, and with himself.

II

So sweet a perfume seems to swim 
Out of his fur both brown and bright, 
I nearly was embalmed one night 
From (only once) caressing him.

Familiar Lar of where I stay, 
He rules, presides, inspires and teaches 
All things to which his empire reaches. 
Perhaps he is a god, or fay.

When to a cherished cat my gaze
Is magnet-drawn and then returns
Back to itself, it there discerns,
With strange excitement and amaze,

Deep down in my own self, the rays 
Of living opals, torch-like gleams 
And pallid fire of eyes, it seems, 
That fixedly return my gaze.

The Cat

I

Along my brain there walks,
As though in its own home,
A lovely, strong and sweet and charming cat.
When it mews, one hardly hears,

So tender and discreet its tone; 
Appeasing or complaining its voice 
Is always rich and deep: 
Therein is its charm and secret.

This voice, which glistens and strains 
Through the darkest soils of my being, 
Satiates me like an harmonious line, 
Delights me like a philter.

It lulls to sleep most cruel ills 
And holds all ecstasy; 
To tell the longest phrase, 
It has no need of words.

No, there is no bow that gnaws
On my heart, perfect instrument,
To make more regally sing
The most vibrant string,

Than your voice, mysterious,
Seraphic, strange cat,
In whom all is, like an angel,
As subtle as harmonious!

II

From its fair and dark fur 
Comes a scent so gentle, that one night 
I was caught in its balm, by having 
Caressed it once, only once.

It is the familiar spirit of the place; 
It judges, presides, inspires 
Everything in its empire; 
It is perhaps a fairy or a god?

When my eyes, drawn like a magnet
To this cat that I love,
Come meekly back again
And I look inside myself,

I see with amazement 
The fire of its pale pupils, 
Clear beacons, living opals, 
Looking at me fixedly.

The Beautiful Ship

I want to name for you, indolent sorceress! 
The divers marks of beauty which adorn your youth; 
I want to describe your beauty, 
In which are blended childhood and maturity.

When you go sweeping by in your full, flowing skirts, 
You resemble a trim ship as it puts to sea 
Under full sail and goes rolling 
Lazily, to a slow and easy rhythm.

On your large, round neck, on your plump shoulders, 
Your head moves proudly and with a strange grace; 
With a placid, triumphant air 
You go your way, majestic child.

I want to name for you, indolent sorceress! 
The divers marks of beauty which adorn your youth; 
I want to describe your beauty, 
In which are blended childhood and maturity.

Your exuberant breast which swells your silken gown,
Your triumphant breast is a lovely cabinet
Whose panels, round and bright,
Catch each flash of light like bucklers,

Exciting bucklers, armed with rosy points!
Cabinet of sweet secrets, crowded with good things,
With wines, with perfumes, with liqueurs
That would make delirious the minds and hearts of men!

When you go sweeping by in your full, flowing skirts,
You resemble a trim ship as it puts to sea
Under full sail and goes rolling 
Lazily, to a slow and easy rhythm.

Your shapely legs beneath the flounces they pursue
Arouse and torment obscure desires
Like two sorceresses who stir 
A black philtre in a deep vessel.

Your arms which would scorn precocious Hercules
Are the worthy rivals of glistening boas,
Made to clasp stubbornly
Your lover, as if to imprint him on your heart.

On your large, round neck, on your plump shoulders, 
Your head moves proudly and with a strange grace;
With a placid, triumphant air 
You go your way, majestic child.

The Splendid Ship

Oh soft enchantress, I'll record with truth
The diverse beauties that adorn your youth.
Yes, I will paint your charm
Of womanhood with childhood arm in arm.

When you go sweeping your wide skirts, to me
You seem a splendid ship that out to sea
Spreads its full sails, and with them
Goes rolling in a soft, slow, lazy rhythm.

Over your tall, round neck and those plump shoulders,
Your head swans forth its pride to all beholders,
With grace triumphant, mild,
And strange, you go your way, majestic child.

Oh soft enchantress, I'll record with truth
The diverse beauties that adorn your youth.
Yes, I will paint your charm
Of womanhood with childhood arm in arm.

Your bosom juts and stretches every stitch,
Triumphant bosom, like a coffer rich
With bosses round and rare,
Like shields that draw the lightning from the air.

Provoking shields, with rosy points uplifted!
Coffer of secret charms, superbly gifted,
Whose scents, liqueurs, and wine
Turn heart and brain deliriously thine.

When you go sweeping your wide skirts, to me
You seem a splendid ship that out to sea
Spreads its full sails, and with them
Goes rolling in a soft, slow, lazy rhythm.

Your noble thighs, beneath the silks they swirl,
Torment obscure desires and tease me, girl;
Like sorcerers they are
That stir black philtres in a deep, cool jar.

Your arms precocious Hercules would grace
And vie with pythons in their bright embrace:
The pressure they impart
Would print your lovers' image on your heart.

Over your tall, round neck and those plump shoulders
Your head swans forth its pride to all beholders,
With grace triumphant, mild,
And strange, you go your way, majestic child.

The Beautiful Ship

I want to tell you, indolent enchantress, 
Of the various beauties that adorn your youth; 
I want to paint for you your beauty 
Of childish maturity.

When you go sweeping the air with your flaring skirts, 
You look like a lovely slip taking to flight 
Heavy with canvas, pitching, 
Rolling in a soft rhythm, both lazy and slow.

On your wide, round neck, on your plump shoulders, 
Your head parades its strange graces; 
Placidly, triumphantly, 
O child of majesty, you go your way.

I want to tell you, indolent enchantress, 
Of the various beauties that adorn your youth; 
I want to paint for you your beauty 
Where childhood touches maturity.

Your breasts thrust forward, heaving their silk, 
Your triumphing breasts are charming cases 
Whose outlined, rounded panels 
Hold flashes of light like twin shields;

Provocative shields, armed with pink tips,
Cases of sweet secrets, full of sweet things,
Of wines and perfumes and liqueurs
Making the brain, the heart delirious!

When you go sweeping the air with your flaring skirts, 
You look like a lovely ship taking to flight, 
Heavy with canvas, you go pitching, 
Rolling in a soft rhythm, both lazy and slow.

Your full legs, under flounces they chase forward, 
Torture and excite dark desires, 
Like two witches who 
Twist some black potion in a deep bowl.

Your arms, which would make light of precocious Hercules,
Rival well two glistening snakes,
Made to bind hopelessly
As if to imprison your lover in your heart.

On your wide, round neck, on your plump shoulders, 
Your head parades its strange graces 
Placid, triumphantly, 
O child of majesty, you go your way.

Invitation to the Voyage

My child, my sister,
Think of the rapture
Of living together there! 
Of loving at will, 
Of loving till death,
In the land that is like you! 
The misty sunlight 
Of those cloudy skies
Has for my spirit the charms, 
So mysterious, 
Of your treacherous eyes,
Shining brightly through their tears.

There all is order and beauty,
Luxury, peace, and pleasure.

Gleaming furniture,
Polished by the years,
Will ornament our bedroom;
The rarest flowers
Mingling their fragrance
With the faint scent of amber,
The ornate ceilings,
The limpid mirrors,
The oriental splendor,
All would whisper there
Secretly to the soul
In its soft, native language.

There all is order and beauty,
Luxury, peace, and pleasure.

See on the canals 
Those vessels sleeping.
Their mood is adventurous;
It's to satisfy
Your slightest desire
That they come from the ends of the earth.
-- The setting suns
Adorn the fields,
The canals, the whole city,
With hyacinth and gold;
The world falls asleep
In a warm glow of light.

There all is order and beauty,
Luxury, peace, and pleasure.

Invitation to the Voyage

My daughter, my sister, 
Consider the vista 
Of living out there, you and I,
To love at our leisure, 
Then, ending our pleasure, 
In climes you resemble to die. 
There the suns, rainy-wet, 
Through clouds rise and set 
With the selfsame enchantment to charm me 
That my senses receive 
From your eyes, that deceive, 
When they shine through your tears to disarm me.

There'll be nothing but beauty, wealth, pleasure, 
With all things in order and measure.

With old treasures furnished, 
By centuries burnished, 
To gleam in the shade of our chamber, 
While the rarest of flowers 
Vaguely mix through the hours 
Their own with the perfume of amber: 
Each sumptuous ceiling, 
Each mirror revealing 
The wealth of the East, will be hung 
So the part and the whole 
May speak to the soul 
In its native, indigenous tongue.

There'll be nothing but beauty, wealth, pleasure, 
With all things in order and measure.

On the channels and streams 
See each vessel that dreams 
In its whimsical vagabond way, 
Since its for your least whim 
The oceans they swim 
From the ends of the night and the day. 
The sun, going down, With its glory will crown 
Canals, fields, and cities entire, 
While the whole earth is rolled 
In the jacinth and gold 
Of its warming and radiant fire.

There'll be nothing but beauty, wealth, pleasure 
With all things in order and measure.

Invitation to the Voyage

Think, would it not be
Sweet to live with me
All alone, my child, my love? -- 
Sleep together, share
All things, in that fair
Country you remind me of? 
Charming in the dawn 
There, the half-withdrawn
Drenched, mysterious sun appears 
In the curdled skies, 
Treacherous as your eyes
Shining from behind their tears.

There, restraint and order bless
Luxury and voluptuousness.

We should have a room 
Never out of bloom:
Tables polished by the palm 
Of the vanished hours 
Should reflect rare flowers
In that amber-scented calm;
Ceilings richly wrought,
Mirrors deep as thought,
Walls with eastern splendor hung,
All should speak apart 
To the homesick heart
In its own dear native tongue.

There, restraint and order bless
Luxury and voluptuousness.

See, their voyage past,
To their moorings fast,
On the still canals asleep, 
These big ships; to bring 
You some trifling thing
They have braved the furious deep.
-- Now the sun goes down,
Tinting dyke and town,
Field, canal, all things in sight,
Hyacinth and gold;
All that we behold
Slumbers in its ruddy light.

There, restraint and order bless
Luxury and voluptuousness.

Invitation to a Journey

My sister, my dear 
Consider how fair, 
Together to live it would be! 
Down yonder to fly 
To love, till we die, 
In the land which resembles thee. 
Those suns that rise 
'Neath erratic skies, 
-- No charm could be like unto theirs --
So strange and divine, 
Like those eyes of thine 
Which glow in the midst of their tears. 

There, all is order and loveliness, 
Luxury, calm and voluptuousness. 

The tables and chairs, 
Polished bright by the years, 
Would decorate sweetly our rooms, 
And the rarest of flowers 
Would twine round our bowers 
And mingle their amber perfumes:
The ceilings arrayed, 
And the mirrors inlaid, 
This Eastern splendour among, 
Would furtively steal 
O'er our skuls, and appeal 
With its tranquillous native tongue. 

There, all is order and loveliness, 
Luxury, calm and voluptuousness. 

In the harbours, peep, 
At the vessels asleep 
(Their humour is always to roam), 
Yet it is but to grant 
Thy smallest want 
From the ends of the earth that they come, 
The sunsets beam 
Upon meadow and stream, 
And upon the city entire 
'Neath a violet crest, 
The world sinks to rest, 
Illumed by a golden fire. 

There, all is order and loveliness, 
Luxury, calm and voluptuousness. 

The Invitation to the Voyage

How sweet, my own, 
Could we live alone 
Over beyond the sea! 
To love and to die 
Indolently 
In the land that's akin to thee! 
Where the suns which rise 
In the watery skies 
Weave soft spells over my sight, 
As thy false eyes do 
When they flicker through 
Their tears with a dim, strange light. 

There all is beauty and symmetry, 
Pleasure and calm and luxury. 

Years that have gone 
Have polished and shone 
The things that would fill our room; 
The flowers most rare 
Which scent the air 
In the richly-ceiling'd gloom, 
And the mirrors profound, 
And the walls around 
With Orient splendour hung, 
To the soul would speak 
Of things she doth seek 
In her gentle native tongue. 

There all is beauty and symmetry, 
Pleasure and calm and luxury. 

The canals are deep 
Where the strange ships sleep 
Far from the land of their birth; 
To quench the fire 
Of thy least desire 
They have come from the ends of the earth. 
The sunsets drown 
Peaceful town 
And meadow, and stagnant stream 
In bistre and gold, 
And the world enfold 
In a warm and luminous dream. 

There all is beauty and symmetry, 
Pleasure and calm and luxury. 

The Irreparable

Can we stifle the old, the lingering Remorse,
That lives, quivers and writhes,
And feeds on us like the worm on the dead, 
Like the grub on the oak?
Can we stifle implacable Remorse?

In what philtre, in what potion, what wine,
Shall we drown this old enemy,
Destructive and greedy as a harlot, 
Patient as the ant?
In what philtre, in what potion, what wine?

Tell it, fair sorceress, O! tell it, if you know,
To this spirit filled with anguish,
So like a dying man crushed beneath the wounded, 
Who is struck by the horses' shoes;
Tell it, fair sorceress, O! tell it, if you know,

To this dying man whom the wolf already scents
And whom the crow watches,
To this broken soldier! if he must despair 
Of having his cross and his grave,
This poor, dying man whom the wolf already scents!

Can one illuminate a black and miry sky?
Can one tear asunder darkness
Thicker than pitch, without morning, without evening,
Without stars, without ominous lightning?
Can one illuminate a black and miry sky?

Hope that shines in the windows of the Inn
Is snuffed out, dead forever!
Without the moon, without light, to find where they lodge
The martyrs of an evil road!
The Devil has put out all the lights at the Inn!

Adorable sorceress, do you love the damned?
Say, do you know the irremissible?
Do you know Remorse, with the poisoned darts,
For whom our hearts serve as targets?
Adorable sorceress, do you love the damned?

The Irreparable gnaws with his accurst teeth
Our soul, pitiful monument,
And often he attacks like the termite
The foundations of the building.
The Irreparable gnaws with his accurst teeth!

-- Sometimes I have seen at the back of a trite stage
Enlivened by a deep-toned orchestra,
A fairy set ablaze a miraculous dawn
In an infernal sky;
Sometimes I have been at the back of a trite stage

A being who was only light, gold and gauze,
Throw down the enormous Satan;
But my heart, which rapture never visits,
Is a playhouse where one awaits
Always, always in vain, the Being with gauze wings!

The Irreparable

How can we choke the old and long Remorse
Which lives, and squirms, and fights
And feeds on us as worms upon a corse, 
Or, on the oak, its mites?
How can we choke the old and long Remorse?

What subtle philtre, wine, or drowsy draught
Will drown that ancient foe,
Greedy as whores in his disastrous craft, 
Ant-patient, sure, and slow?
What subtle philtre, wine or drowsy draught?

Lovely enchantress, if you know it, say
To this soul whelmed with woes,
Dying, whom loads of wounded crush to clay 
Under the horses' shoes:
Lovely enchantress, if you know it, say

To this poor moribund, while wolves yet stalk him
And ravens croak his doom,
To this spent soldier say if fate will baulk him 
Even of a cross or tomb -- 
Say to this moribund, while wolves yet stalk him!

Can this black muddy sky be ever lighted,
The shades be ever torn,
Denser than pitch, to day and dusk benighted, 
To lightning, stars, or morn?
Can this black muddy sky be ever lighted?

The candle Hope that shows the Inn to strangers 
Is blown out, snuffed, and melted.
Lacking both moon and glimmer, how shall rangers 
Of evil roads be sheltered?
The devil snuffed the light that burned for strangers.

Sweet witch, do you love spirits lost to grace? 
Whose sins are not remitted?
Say, do you know Remorse, with venomed face, 
By whom our hearts are spitted?
Sweet witch, do you love spirits lost to grace?

The Irreparable gnaws us where it lurks
And for our soul's defacement,
As on a monument the termite, works 
Up from the very basement.
The Irreparable gnaws us where it lurks.

In tawdry theatres I've sometimes seen
How, to the blare of brasses,
Miraculous, to light some hellish scene, 
Like dawn, a fairy passes;
In tawdry theatres I've often seen

That by this fay of light, and gold, and gauzes, 
Some monstrous fiend is slain.
But my heart knows no raptures or applauses -- 
A fleapit where, in vain,
One waits, and waits the creature winged with gauzes.

The Irreparable

How shall we kill this old, this long Remorse 
Which writhes continually 
And feeds on us as worms upon a corse, 
Maggots upon a tree? 
How stifle this implacable Remorse? 

What wine, what drug, what philtre known of man 
Will drown this ancient foe, 
Ruthless and ravenous as a courtesan. 
Sure as an ant, and slow? 
What wine? What drug? What philtre known of man? 

O tell, fair sorceress, tell if thou dost know 
This soul distraught with pain 
As a dying soldier crushed and bruised below 
Steel hooves and wounded men! 
O tell, fair sorceress, tell if thou dost know. 

This poor racked wretch the wolf already flays 
O'er whom the vultures whirr. 
This broken warrior! if in vain he prays 
For cross and sepulchre. 
This anguished wretch the wolf already flays! 

How should we rend dense gulfs which know not dawn 
Nor eve, nor any star? 
How pierce with light skies which abyss-like yawn 
When black as pitch they are? 
How should we rend dense gulfs which know not dawn? 

Hope glimmered in the windows of the Inn, 
But Hope is dead for aye! 
Moonless and rayless, can poor travellers win 
To shelter from the way? 
The Devil made dark the windows of the Inn! 

Dost love the damned, adorable sorceress? 
Dost know the smitten sore? 
Dost know Remorse that, grim and pitiless, 
Feeds at my heart's red core? 
Dost love the damned, adorable sorceress? 

My soul is prey to the Irreparable, 
It gnaws with tooth accurst, 
And, termite-like, the cunning spawn of hell 
Mines the foundations first! 
My soul is prey to the Irreparable! 

II 

Often within a theatre I have seen, 
'Thwart the orchestral roar, 
A dazzling Fairy stand in sudden sheen 
Where all was gloom before! 
Often within a theatre I have seen 

A being made of light and gold and gauze 
Fling Demons to their fate! 
But on my heart's dark stage an endless pause 
Is all, and I await 
In vain, in vain the Spirit with wings of gauze! 

The Irreparable

Can we suppress the old Remorse
Who bends our heart beneath his stroke,
Who feeds, as worms feed on the corse,
Or as the acorn on the oak?
Can we suppress the old Remorse?

Ah, in what philtre, wine, or spell,
May we drown this our ancient foe,
Destructive glutton, gorging well,
Patient as the ants, and slow?
What wine, what philtre, or what spell?

Tell it, enchantress, if you can,
Tell me, with anguish overcast,
Wounded, as a dying man,
Beneath the swift hoofs hurrying past.
Tell it, enchantress, if you can,

To him the wolf already tears
Who sees the carrion pinions wave
This broken warrior who despairs
To have a cross above his grave -- 
This wretch the wolf already tears.

Can one illume a leaden sky,
Or tear apart the shadowy veil
Thicker than pitch, no star on high,
Not one funereal glimmer pale?
Can one illume a leaden sky?

Hope lit the windows of the Inn,
But now that shining flame is dead;
And how shall martyred pilgrims win
Along the moonless road they tread?
Satan has darkened all the Inn!

Witch, do you love accursed hearts?
Say, do you know the reprobate?
Know you Remorse, whose venomed darts
Make souls the targets for their hate?
Witch, do you know accursed hearts?

The Might-have-been with tooth accursed
Gnaws at the piteous souls of men,
The deep foundations suffer first,
And all the structure crumbles then
Beneath the bitter tooth accursed.

II

Often, when seated at the play,
And sonorous music lights the stage,
I see the frail hand of a Fay
With magic dawn illume the rage
Of the dark sky. Oft at the play

A being made of gauze and fire
Casts to the earth a Demon great.
And my heart, whence all hopes expire,
Is like a stage where I await,
In vain, the Fay with wings of fire!

Conversation

You are a lovely autumn sky, clear and rosy! 
But sadness rises in me like the sea, 
And as it ebbs, leaves on my sullen lips 
The burning memory of its bitter slime.

-- In vain does your hand slip over my swooning breast; 
What it seeks, darling, is a place plundered 
By the claws and the ferocious teeth of woman. 
Seek my heart no longer; the beasts have eaten it.

My heart is a palace polluted by the mob;
They get drunk there, kill, tear each other's hair!
-- A perfume floats about your naked breast!...

O Beauty, ruthless scourge of souls, you desire it!
With the fire of your eyes, brilliant as festivals,
Bum these tatters which the beasts spared!

Conversation

You're like an autumn sky, rose, clear, and placid. 
But sorrow whelms me, like the tide's assault, 
And ebbing, leaves upon my lips the acid 
And muddy-bitter memory of its salt.

Your hand may stroke my breast, but not console. 
What it seeks there is but a hole, deep caverned 
By women's claws and fangs, and ransacked whole. 
Seek not my heart, on which the beasts have ravened.

My heart's a palace plundered by the rabble: 
They tope, they kill, in blood and guts they scrabble:
-- A perfume swims around your naked breast!

O Beauty, flail of spirits, you know best! 
With your eyes' fire, lit up as for a spree, 
Char the poor rags those beasts have left of me!

Episode

You are a lovely, rosy, lucid autumn sky! 
But sadness mounts upon me like a flooding sea, 
And ebbs, and ebbing, leaves my lips morose and dry, 
Smarting with salty ooze, bitter with memory.

-- Useless to slide your hand like that along my breast; 
That which it seeks, my dear, is plundered; it is slit 
By the soft paw of woman, that clawed while it caressed. 
Useless to hunt my heart; the beasts have eaten it.

My heart is like a palace where the mob has spat;
There they carouse, they seize each other's hair, they kill.
-- Your breast is naked... what exotic scent is that?...

O Beauty, iron flail of souls, it is your will! 
So be it! Eyes of fire, bright in the darkness there, 
Bum up these strips of flesh the beasts saw fit to spare.

Causerie

You are an autumn sky, suffused with rose...
Yet sadness rises in me like the sea, 
And on my sombre lip, when it outflows. 
Leaves its salt burning slime for memory. 

Over my swooning breast your fingers stray; 
In vain, alas! My breast is a void pit 
Sacked by the tooth and claw of woman. Nay, 
Seek not my heart; the beasts have eaten it! 

My heart is as a palace plundered 
By the wolves, wherein they gorge and rend and kill, 
A perfume round thy naked throat is shed...

Beauty, strong scourge of souls, O work thy will! 
Scorch with thy fiery eyes which shine like feasts 
These shreds of flesh rejected by the beasts! 

The Eyes of Beauty

You are a sky of autumn, pale and rose;
But all the sea of sadness in my blood
Surges, and ebbing, leaves my lips morose,
Salt with the memory of the bitter flood.

In vain your hand glides my faint bosom o'er,
That which you seek, beloved, is desecrate
By woman's tooth and talon; ah, no more
Seek in me for a heart which those dogs ate.

It is a ruin where the jackals rest,
And rend and tear and glut themselves and slay -- 
A perfume swims about your naked breast!

Beauty, hard scourge of spirits, have your way!
With flame-like eyes that at bright feasts have flared
Burn up these tatters that the beasts have spared!

Conversation

You are the loveliness, the clearness, the red of autumn skies!
But sadness climbs like a sea in me, 
Leaving, in reflux, upon my bitter lip
The sharp memory of its biting slime.

 -- In vain your hand slips on my fainting chest; 
What it seeks, my darling, is but a place pillaged 
By the fang and the fierce tooth of woman. 
Do not search for my heart anymore; the wild beasts have eaten it.

My heart is a palace soiled by the mob;
There they swill, and they brawl, and they kill!
 -- A fragrance swims around your naked breasts.

O Beauty, cruel scourge of souls, you long for it!
With your eyes that flame, brilliant as festivals,
Bum these tatters that the beasts have spared me!

The Man Who Tortures Himself

To J. G. F.

I shall strike you without anger
And without hate, like a butcher,
As Moses struck the rock!
And from your eyelids I shall make

The waters of suffering gush forth
To inundate my Sahara.
My desire swollen with hope
Will float upon your salty tears

Like a vessel which puts to sea, 
And in my heart that they'll make drunk 
Your beloved sobs will resound 
Like a drum beating the charge!

Am I not a discord 
In the heavenly symphony, 
Thanks to voracious Irony 
Who shakes me and who bites me?

She's in my voice, the termagant! 
All my blood is her black poison! 
I am the sinister mirror 
In which the vixen looks.

I am the wound and the dagger! 
I am the blow and the cheek! 
I am the members and the wheel, 
Victim and executioner!

I'm the vampire of my own heart
-- One of those utter derelicts 
Condemned to eternal laughter, 
But who can no longer smile!

Heautontimoroumenos

To J. G. F.

I'll strike you, but without the least
Anger -- as butchers poll an ox,
Or Moses, when he struck the rocks -- 
That from your eyelid thus released,

The lymph of suffering may brim
To slake my desert of its drought.
So my desire, by hope made stout,
Upon your salty tears may swim,

Like a proud ship, far out from shore. 
Within my heart, which they'll confound 
With drunken joy, your sobs will sound 
Like drums that beat a charge in war.

Am I not a faulty chord 
In all this symphony divine, 
Thanks to the irony malign 
That shakes and cuts me like a sword?

It's in my voice, the raucous jade! 
It's in my blood's black venom too! 
I am the looking-glass, wherethrough 
Megera sees herself portrayed!

I am the wound, and yet the blade! 
The smack, and yet the cheek that takes it! 
The limb, and yet the wheel that breaks it, 
The torturer, and he who's flayed!

One of the sort whom all revile, 
A Vampire, my own blood I quaff, 
Condemned to an eternal laugh 
Because I know not how to smile.

Heauton Timoroumenos

I mean to strike you without hate,
As butchers do; as Moses did
The rock. From under either lid
Your tears will flow to inundate

This huge Sahara which is I.
My heart, insensible with pain,
Caught in that flood will live again:
Will care whether it live or die -- 

Will strive as in the salty sea,
Drunken with brine and all but drowned,
Yet driven onward by the sound
Of your wild sobbing endlessly!

For look -- I am at war, my dear, 
With the whole universe. I know 
There is no medicine for my woe. 
Believe me, it is called Despair.

It runs in all my veins. I pray: 
It cries in all my words. I am 
The very glass where what I damn 
Leers and admires itself all day.

I am the wound -- I am the knife 
The deep wound scabbards; the outdrawn 
Rack, and the writhing thereupon; 
The lifeless, and the taker of life.

I murder what I most adore, 
Laughing: I am indeed of those 
Condemned for ever without repose 
To laugh -- but who can smile no more.

Heautontimoroumenos
The Man Who Tortures Himself

I shall cleave without scrape or shock, 
And, like a butcher, without hate, 
Like Moses, when he struck the rock. 
From your eyes I shall generate 
Waters of woe throughout the years 
To quench my fierce Sahara fires, 
Swollen with vast hope, my desires 
Shall float upon your bitter tears 
Like a proud vessel, sailing large; 
And in my heart, drunk at the sound, 
Your cherished sobbing shall resound 
Like drums beating the long lost charge.

Am I not a discordant note 
In the celestial symphony, 
Thanks to voracious Irony 
Who shakes and bites me at the throat? 
She's in my voice, the scold; her black 
Poison is all my blood, alas! 
I am the direful looking glass 
Which flashes her reflection back. 
I am the wound, the knives that strike, 
The blows that crush, the head that reels, 
I am wrenched limbs and grinding wheels, 
Victim and hangman, as you like!

Vampire of my own heart, meanwhile, 
A derelict, I am of those 
Doomed to eternal laughter's throes, 
Yet powerless to frame a smile!

L'Heautontimouromenos

I'll strike thee without enmity
nor wrath, like butchers at the block,
like Moses when he smote the rock!
I'll make those eyelids gush for me

with springs of suffering, whose flow
shall slake the desert of my thirst;
-- a salt flood, where my lust accurst,
with Hope to plump her sail, shall go

as from the port a pitching barge,
and in my heart they satiate
thy sobs I love shall fulminate
loud as a drum that beats a charge!

for am I not a clashing chord
in all Thy heavenly symphony,
thanks to this vulture Irony
that shakes and bites me always, Lord?

she's in my voice, the screaming elf!
my poisoned blood came all from her!
I am the mirror sinister
in which the vixen sees herself!

I am the wound and I the knife!
I am the blow I give, and feel!
I am the broken limbs, the wheel, 
the hangman and the strangled life!

I am my heart's own vampire, for
God has forsaken me, and men,
these lips can never smile again,
but laugh they must, and evermore!

In Praise of My Frances

I'll sing to you on a new note, 
O young hind that gambols gaily 
In the solitude of my heart.

Be adorned with wreaths of flowers, 
O delightful woman 
By whom our sins are washed away!

As from a benign Lethe, 
I shall drink kisses from you, 
Who were given a magnet's strength.

When a tempest of vices
Was sweeping down on every path,
You appeared, O divinity!

Like the star of salvation
Above a disastrous shipwreck...
I shall place my heart on your altar!

Reservoir full of virtue, 
Fountain of eternal youth, 
Restore the voice to my mute lips!

You have burned that which was filthy, 
Made smooth that which was rough, 
Strengthened that which was weak.

In my hunger you are the inn, 
In the darkness my lamp, 
Lead me always on virtue's path.

Add your strength now to my strength,
Sweet bath scented
With pleasant perfumes!

Shine forth from my loins,
O cuirass of chastity,
That was dipped in seraphic water,

Cup glittering with precious stones, 
Bread seasoned with salt, delectable dish, 
Heavenly wine -- My Frances.

Praises of My Francisca

(Verses to a learned and devout Milliner)

Upon new chords of you I sing. 
And the new-born bud you bring 
From solitude, the pure heart's Spring.

Your brows should be with garlands twined 
Woman of delightful mind, 
Who our trespasses unbind.

As the wondrous balm of Lethe, 
Through thy kisses, I will breathe thee. 
All are magnetised who see thee.

When my vices, wild and stormy,
From my wonted courses bore me
It was You appeared before me,

Star of Oceans! you that alter 
Courses, when the pilots falter -- 
Take my heart upon your altar.

Cistern full of virtuous ruth, 
Fountain of eternal youth, 
Give to dumbness speech and truth!

What was dirty, you cremated, 
What uneven -- you equated, 
What was weak you re-created.

Inn, on the hungry roads I tramp, 
And, in the dark, a guiding lamp 
To steer the lost one back to camp.

To my strength add strength, O sweet 
Bath, where scents and unguents meet! 
Anoint me for some peerless feat!

Holy water most seraphic, 
On the lusts in which I traffic 
Flash your chastity ecstatic.

Bowl of gems where radiance dances. 
Salt that the holy bread enhances, 
And sacred wine -- your name is Frances!

Francescae Meae Laudes

I shall sing new chords, O hind, 
As you gambol unconfined 
Through my solitary mind.

Rest, adorned with wreaths of flowers,
Comely woman whose vast powers
Wash away these sins of ours

As from Lethe's stream I shall
Drink your kisses, one and all,
Magnet-like and magical.

When our vices stormily 
Swept down every path with glee, 
You approved, O Deity!

Like the bright star of salvation
Amid shipwreck's desolation -- 
Take my heart in rapt oblation.

Source of every good and store
Of eternal youth, restore
Song to my mute lips once more.

What was foul you calcinated
What was rough you Ievigated,
What was weak you stimulated.

In my hunger, you the inn,
In my dark, the lamp; and in
Your pale hands, an end to sin.

Add your strength to mine, new-sent,
Sweet bath ever redolent
Of the suaver perfumes blent.

From my loins, gleam radiantly
O cuirass of chastity
Steeped in balm seraphically.

Cup with precious gems ashine,
Savory bread, celestial wine,
Blessed food, Francesca mine!

To a Creole Lady

In the perfumed country which the sun caresses, 
I knew, under a canopy of crimson trees 
And palms from which indolence rains into your eyes, 
A Creole lady whose charms were unknown.

Her complexion is pale and warm; the dark enchantress 
Affects a noble air with the movements of her neck. 
Tall and slender, she walks like a huntress; 
Her smile is calm and her eye confident.

If you went, Madame, to the true land of glory, 
On the banks of the Seine or along the green Loire, 
Beauty fit to ornament those ancient manors,

You'd make, in the shelter of those shady retreats, 
A thousand sonnets grow in the hearts of poets, 
Whom your large eyes would make more subject than your slaves.

To a Colonial Lady

In scented countries by the sun caressed 
I've known, beneath a tent of purple boughs, 
And palmtrees shedding slumber as they drowse, 
A creole lady with a charm unguessed.

She's pale, and warm, and duskily beguiling; 
Nobility is moulded in her neck; 
Slender and tall she holds herself in check, 
An huntress born, sure-eyed, and quiet-smiling.

Should you go, Madam, to the land of glory
Along the Seine or Loire, where you would merit
To ornament some mansion famed in story,

Your eyes would bum in those deep-shaded parts, 
And breed a thousand rhymes in poets' hearts, 
Tamed like the negro slaves that you inherit.

To a Creolean Lady

In a country perfumed with the sun's embrace, 
I knew 'neath a dais of purpled palms, 
And branches where idleness weeps o'er one's face, 
A Creolean lady of unknown charms. 

Her tint, pale and warm -- this bewitching bride, 
Displays a nobly nurtured mien, 
Courageous and grand like a huntsman, her stride;
A tranquil smile and eyes serene. 

If, madam, you'd go to the true land of gain, 
By the banks of the verdant Loire or the Seine, 
How worthy to garnish some pile of renown. 

You'd awake in the calm of some shadowy nest, 
A thousand songs in the poet's breast, 
That your eyes would inspire far more than your brown. 

To a Creole Lady

In that perfumed country caressed by the sun,
I have known, under a canopy of purple trees 
And palms raining idleness upon the eyes, 
A creole lady of private beauty.

Her shade is pale and warm; this brown enchantress 
Has gracefully mannered airs in her neck; 
Large and sinuous, walking like a huntress, 
Her smile is silent and her eyes secure.

If you should go, Madam, to the true country of glory,
On the banks of the Seine or of the green Loire,
Fair lady fit to decorate ancient mansions,

In some shady and secluded refuge, you would awake 
A thousand sonnets in the hearts of poets, 
Whom your great eyes would make more subject than your Blacks.

Grieving and Wandering

Tell me, does your heart sometimes fly away, Agatha, 
Far from the black ocean of the filthy city, 
Toward another ocean where splendor glitters, 
Blue, clear, profound, as is virginity? 
Tell me, does your heart sometimes fly away, Agatha?

The sea, the boundless sea, consoles us for our toil!
What demon endowed the sea, that raucous singer,
Whose accompanist is the roaring wind,
With the sublime function of cradle-rocker?
The sea, the boundless sea, consoles us for our toil!

Take me away, carriage! Carry me off, frigate! 
Far, far away! Here the mud is made with our tears!
-- Is it true that sometimes the sad heart of Agatha 
Says: Far from crimes, from remorse, from sorrow, 
Take me away, carriage, carry me off, frigate?

How far away you are, O perfumed Paradise,
Where under clear blue sky there's only love and joy,
Where all that one loves is worthy of love,
Where the heart is drowned in sheer enjoyment!
How far away you are, O perfumed Paradise!

But the green Paradise of childhood loves
The outings, the singing, the kisses, the bouquets,
The violins vibrating behind the hills,
And the evenings in the woods, with jugs of wine
-- But the green Paradise of childhood loves,

That sinless Paradise, full of furtive pleasures, 
Is it farther off now than India and China? 
Can one call it back with plaintive cries, 
And animate it still with a silvery voice, 
That sinless Paradise full of furtive pleasures?

Moesta et Errabunda

Agatha, does your heart rise up and fly, 
Far from the city's black and sordid sea 
Towards a sea that's blue as any sky, 
And clear and deep as pure virginity? 
Agatha, does your heart rise up and fly?

The sea, the mighty sea, consoles our labour. 
What demon taught the sea with raucous verse 
To choir the organ which the winds belabour 
And lullaby our sorrows like a nurse? 
The sea, the mighty sea, consoles our labour.

Train, bear me; take me, ship, to other climes! 
Far, far! For here the mud is made of tears.
-- Does Agatha's sad heart not say, at times, 
"Far from remorses, sorrows, crimes, and fears, 
Train, bear me; take me, ship, to other climes"?

How distant is that perfumed paradise! 
Where all is joy and love with azure crowned, 
Where all one loves is truly worth the price, 
And hearts in pure voluptuousness are drowned. 
How distant is that perfumed paradise!

But the green paradise of childish love,
Of races, songs, and kisses, and bouquets,
Of fiddles shrilling in the hills above,
And jars of wine, and woods, and dying rays -- 
But the green paradise of childish love,

Innocent paradise of furtive joys, 
Is it far off as India or Hong Kong? 
Could it be conjured by a plaintive voice 
Or animated by a silver song -- 
That far off paradise of furtive joys?

Moesta Et Errabunda

Agatha, tell me, thy heart -- does it sometimes fly away, 
Far from the vast dark ocean of the mournful town, 
Toward one still vaster, mirroring the blue, blue day, 
Mindless and deep: a flood wherein all sorrows drown? 
Agatha, tell me, thy heart -- does it sometimes fly away?

The sea, the enormous sea has rest for our desires: 
By what demoniac irony can that fierce thing, 
That raucous howler to the winds' untuneful choirs, 
Assuage our deepest woe with its wild clarnouring? 
The sea, the enormous sea has rest for our desires.

Carry me off, loud trains! Abstract me, silent ships,
Far, far! Here even the earth is miry with our tears!
Is it not true that sometimes Agatha's sweet lips
Murmur: "Far from regrets, from griefs, from cruel fears,
Carry me off, loud trains! Abstract me, silent ships!"

How far, how far away, that paradise above,
Wbere all our ills supposedly are put to rest,
Where everything we love is worthy of our love,
And the unburdened heart lies weightless in the breast
How far, how far away, that paradise above!

But the green, earthly paradise of childhood, even,
The songs, the furtive kisses, the dances, the bouquets,
The picnics on the hillside -- that unpretentious heaven
Of summer twilights where a distant music plays:
But the green, earthly paradise of childhood, even,

Where all our cares are mended in small secret joys -- 
Is it already farther than Shanghai or Ceylon? 
Or has the heart some kingdom no suffering destroys, 
Where those young voices laugh, where those old tunes play on 
Where all our cares are mended in small secret joys?

Moesta et Errabunda

Oh, Agatha, tell! does thy heart not at times fly away? 
Far from the city impure and the lowering sea, 
To another ocean that blinds with its dazzling array, 
So blue and so clear and profound, like virginity? 
Oh, Agatha, tell! does thy heart not at times fly away? 

The sea, the vast ocean our travail and trouble consoles! 
What demon hath gifted the sea with a voice from on high, 
To sing us (attuned to an Aeolus-organ that rolls 
Forth a grumbling burden) a lenitive lullabye? 
The sea, the vast ocean our travail and trouble consoles! 

Oh, carry me, waggons, oh, sailing-ships, help me depart! 
Far, far, here the dust is quite wet with our showering tears, 
Oh, say! it is true that Agatha's desolate heart, 
Proclaimeth, "Away from remorse, and from crimes, and from cares,"
Oh, carry me, waggons, oh, sailing ships, help me depart! 

How distant you seem to be, perfumed Elysian fields! 
Wherein there is nothing but sunshine and love and glee;
Where all that one loves is so worthy, and lovingly yields, 
And our hearts float about in the purest of ecstasy, 
How distant you seem to be, perfumed Elysian fields! 

But the green paradise of those transient infantile loves, 
The strolls, and the songs, and the kisses, and bunches of flowers, 
The viols vibrating beyond, in the mountainous groves, 
With the chalice of wine and the evening, entwined, in the bowers, 
But the green paradise of those transient infantile loves. 

That innocent heaven o'erflowing with furtive delight, 
Than China or India, is it still further away? 
Or, could one with pityful prayers bring it back to our sight? 
Or yet with a silvery voice o'er the ages convey 
That innocent heaven o'erflowing with furtive delight! 

Weeping and Wandering

Say, Agatha, if at times your spirit turns
Far from the black sea of the city's mud,
To another ocean, where the splendour burns
All blue, and clear, and deep as maidenhood?
Say, Agatha, if your spirit thither turns?

The boundless sea consoles the weary mind!
What demon gave the sea -- that chantress hoarse
To the huge organ of the chiding wind -- 
The function grand to rock us like a nurse?
The boundless ocean soothes the jaded mind!

O car and frigate, bear me far away,
For here our tears moisten the very clay.
Is't true that Agatha's sad heart at times
Says, Far from sorrows, from remorse, from crimes,
Remove me, car, and, frigate, bear away?

O perfumed paradise, how far removed,
Where 'neath a clear sky all is love and joy,
Where all we love is worthy to be loved,
And pleasure drowns the heart, but does not cloy.
O perfumed paradise, so far removed!

But the green paradise of childlike loves,
The walks, the songs, the kisses, and the flowers,
The violins dying behind the hills, the hours
Of evening and the wine-flasks in the groves.
But the green paradise of early loves,

The innocent paradise, full of stolen joys,
Is't farther off than ev'n the Indian main?
Can we recall it with out plaintive cries,
Or give it life, with silvery voice, again,
The innocent paradise, full of furtive joys?

Moesta et errabunda

say, Agatha, dost thou in dreams delight
-- far, far from Paris, black and miry sea --
to rove where other oceans burst in light,
blue, deep, and crystal-clear as chastity?
say, Agatha, dost thou in dreams delight?

the vast, vast ocean is our comforter!
what demon gave the hoarse resounding sea
-- and the gruff winds' great organ made for her --
that siren voice to soothe our misery?
the vast, vast ocean is our comforter!

bear me away, swift car and frigate smart!
afar! -- afar! this mire is made of tears!
-- Agatha, truly does thy mournful heart
cry out: afar from sin, remorse and fears,
bear me away, swift car and frigate smart!

how far from us that fragrant Eden lies,
where all is azure clear and love and joy,
where all we loved was worthy in love's eyes,
where hearts were drowned in bliss without alloy!
how far from us that fragrant Eden lies!

but the green Eden of our earliest loves
-- songs, roses, races, with a kiss to win,
the jugs of wine at dusk in shadowy groves
where died, afar, a quivering violin,
-- but the green Eden of our earliest loves,

our Eden of pure tremulous joy and bliss
-- is it now farther than the Asian shore?
can tears or cries recall each magic kiss,
or prayers or silvery words some eve restore
our Eden of pure tremulous joy and bliss?

Cats

Both ardent lovers and austere scholars 
Love in their mature years 
The strong and gentle cats, pride of the house, 
Who like them are sedentary and sensitive to cold.

Friends of learning and sensual pleasure, 
They seek the silence and the horror of darkness; 
Erebus would have used them as his gloomy steeds: 
If their pride could let them stoop to bondage.

When they dream, they assume the noble attitudes 
Of the mighty sphinxes stretched out in solitude, 
Who seem to fall into a sleep of endless dreams;

Their fertile loins are full of magic sparks, 
And particles of gold, like fine grains of sand, 
Spangle dimly their mystic eyes.

Cats

Sages austere and fervent lovers both, 
In their ripe season, cherish cats, the pride 
Of hearths, strong, mild, and to themselves allied 
In chilly stealth and sedentary sloth.

Friends both to lust and learning, they frequent 
Silence, and love the horror darkness breeds. 
Erebus would have chosen them for steeds 
To hearses, could their pride to it have bent.

Dreaming, the noble postures they assume 
Of sphinxes stretching out into the gloom 
That seems to swoon into an endless trance.

Their fertile flanks are full of sparks that tingle, 
And particles of gold, like grains of shingle, 
Vaguely be-star their pupils as they glance.

Cats

No one but indefatigable lovers and old 
Chilly philosophers can understand the true 
Charm of these animals serene and potent, who 
Likewise are sedentary and suffer from the cold.

They are the friends of learning and of sexual bliss; 
Silence they love, and darkness, where temptation breeds. 
Erebus would have made them his funereal steeds, 
Save that their proud free nature would not stoop to this.

Like those great sphinxes lounging through eternity 
In noble attitudes upon the desert sand, 
They gaze incuriously at nothing, calm and wise.

Their fecund loins give forth electric flashes, and 
Thousands of golden particles drift ceaselessly, 
Like galaxies of stars, in their mysterious eyes.

Cats

All ardent lovers and all sages prize, 
-- As ripening years incline upon their brows --
The mild and mighty cats -- pride of the house --
That like unto them are indolent, stern and wise. 

The friends of Learning and of Ecstasy, 
They search for silence and the horrors of gloom;
The devil had used them for his steeds of Doom, 
Could he alone have bent their pride to slavery. 

When musing, they display those outlines chaste, 
Of the great sphinxes -- stretched o'er the sandy waste, 
That seem to slumber deep in a dream without end: 

From out their loins a fountainous furnace flies, 
And grains of sparkling gold, as fine as sand, 
Bestar the mystic pupils of their eyes. 

The Cats

The lover and the stern philosopher 
Both love, in their ripe time, the confident 
Soft cats, the house's chiefest ornament, 
Who like themselves are cold and seldom stir. 

Of knowledge and of pleasure amorous, 
Silence they seek and Darkness' fell domain; 
Had not their proud souls scorned to brook his rein, 
They would have made grim steeds for Erebus. 

Pensive they rest in noble attitudes 
Like great stretched sphinxes in vast solitudes 
Which seem to sleep wrapt in an endless dream; 

Their fruitful loins are full of sparks divine, 
And gleams of gold within their pupils shine 
As 'twere within the shadow of a stream. 

Owls

Under the dark yews which shade them, 
The owls are perched in rows, 
Like so many strange gods, 
Darting their red eyes. They meditate.

Without budging they will remain 
Till that melancholy hour 
When, pushing back the slanting sun, 
Darkness will take up its abode.

Their attitude teaches the wise 
That in this world one must fear 
Movement and commotion;

Man, enraptured by a passing shadow, 
Forever bears the punishment 
Of having tried to change his place.

The Owls

Within the shelter of black yews 
The owls in ranks are ranged apart 
Like foreign gods, whose eyeballs dart 
Red fire. They meditate and muse.

Without a stir they will remain 
Till, in its melancholy hour, 
Thrusting the level sun from power, 
The shade establishes its reign.

Their attitude instructs the sage, 
Content with what is near at hand, 
To shun all motion, strife, and rage.

Men, crazed with shadows that they chase, 
Bear, as a punishment, the brand 
Of having wished to change their place.

The Owls

The owls that roost in the black yew 
Along one limb in solemn state, 
And with a red eye look you through, 
Are eastern gods; they meditate.

No feather stirs on them, not one, 
Until that melancholy hour 
When night, supplanting the weak sun, 
Resumes her interrupted power.

Their attitude instructs the wise
To shun all action, all surprise.
Suppose there passed a lovely face, -- 

Who even longs to follow it, 
Must feel for ever the disgrace 
Of having all but moved a bit.

Owls

Beneath the shades of sombre yews, 
The silent owls sit ranged in rows, 
Like ancient idols, strangely pose, 
And darting fiery eyes, they muse. 

Immovable, they sit and gaze, 
Until the melancholy hour, 
At which the darknesses devour 
The faded sunset's slanting rays. 

Their attitude, instructs the wise, 
That he -- within this world -- who flies 
From tumult and from merriment;

The man allured by a passing face, 
For ever bears the chastisement 
Of having wished to change his place. 

The Owls

'Neath their black yews in solemn state 
The owls are sitting in a row 
Like foreign gods; and even so 
Blink their red eyes; they meditate. 

Quite motionless they hold them thus 
Until at last the day is done, 
And, driving down the slanting sun, 
The sad night is victorious. 

They teach the wise who gives them ear 
That in this world he most should fear 
All things which loud or restless be. 

Who, dazzled by a passing shade, 
Follows it, never will be free 
Till the dread penalty be paid. 

The Owls

Under the overhanging yews,
The dark owls sit in solemn state,
Like stranger gods; by twos and twos
Their red eyes gleam. They meditate.

Motionless thus they sit and dream
Until that melancholy hour
When, with the sun's last fading gleam,
The nightly shades assume their power.

From their still attitude the wise
Will learn with terror to despise
All tumult, movement, and unrest;

For he who follows every shade,
Carries the memory in his breast,
Of each unhappy journey made.

The Flawed Bell

It is bitter and sweet on winter nights 
To listen by the fire that smokes and palpitates, 
To distant souvenirs that rise up slowly 
At the sound of the chimes that sing in the fog.

Happy is the bell which in spite of age
Is vigilant and healthy, and with lusty throat
Faithfully sounds its religious call,
Like an old soldier watching from his tent!

I, my soul is flawed, and when, a prey to ennui,
She wishes to fill the cold night air with her songs,
It often happens that her weakened voice

Resembles the death rattle of a wounded man, 
Forgotten beneath a heap of dead, by a lake of blood, 
Who dies without moving, striving desperately.

The Cracked Bell

It's sweet and bitter, of a winter night, 
To hear, beside the crackling, smoking log, 
Far memories prepare themselves for flight 
To carillons that sound amid the fog.

Happy's the bell whose vigorous throat on high, 
in spite of time, is sound and still unspent, 
To hurl his faithful and religious cry 
Like an old soldier watching in his tent.

My soul is cracked, and when amidst its care 
It tries with song to fill the frosty air, 
Sometimes, its voice seems like the feeble croak

A wounded soldier makes, lost in the smoke, 
Beneath a pile of dead, in bloody mire, 
Trying, with fearful efforts, to expire.

The Cracked Bell

Bitter and sweet it is on these long winter nights 
To sit before the fire and watch the smoking log 
Beat like a heart; and hear our lost, our mute delights 
Call with the carillons that ring out in the fog.

What certitude, what health, sounds from that brazen throat, 
In spite of age and rust, alert! O happy bell, 
Sending into the dark your clear religious note, 
Like an old soldier crying through the night, "All's well!"

I am not thus; my soul is cracked across by care;
Its voice, that once could clang upon this icy air,
Has lost the power, it seems, -- comes faintly forth, instead,

As from the rattling throat of a hurt man who lies 
Beside a lake of blood, under a heap of dead, 
And cannot stir, and in prodigious struggling dies.

The Flawed Bell

Bitter and sweet it is, in winter night,
Hard by the flickering fire that smokes, to list
While far-off memories rise in sad slow flight,
With chimes that echo singing through the mist.

O blessëd be the bell whose vigorous throat,
In spite of age alert, with strength unspent,
Utters religiously his faithful note,
Like an old warrior watching near the tent!

My soul, alas! is flawed, and when despair
Would people with her songs the chill night-air
Too oft they faint in hoarse enfeebled tones,

As when a wounded man forgotten moans
By the red pool, beneath a heap of dead,
And dying writhes in frenzy on his bed.

The Broken Bell

How sweet and bitter, on a winter night, 
Beside the palpitating fire to list, 
As, slowly, distant memories alight, 
To sounds of chimes that sing across the mist. 

Oh, happy is that bell with hearty throat, 
Which neither age nor time can e'er defeat, 
Which faithfully uplifts its pious note, 
Like an aged soldier on his beat. 

For me, my soul is cracked, and 'mid her cares, 
Would often fill with her songs the midnight airs;
And oft it chances that her feeble moan 

Is like the wounded warrior's fainting groan, 
Who by a lake of blood, 'neath bodies slain, 
In anguish falls, and never moves again. 

La Cloche felee

'tis bitter joy, as winter evenings wear
before a smoking hearth which flames aghast,
to hear slow memories mounting from the past,
while church-bells pierce the pall of misty air.

blessed the flawless bell, of metal rare,
the full-toned bourdon, void of rift and rust,
which like a guardsman faithful to his trust
hurls forth unfailingly its call to prayer!

my soul's a riven bell, that timidly
would fill the frozen night with melody,
but oft it falters, whisperingly weak

as, echoing over lakes of blood, a shriek
muffled by mounds of dead, from one who lies
moveless as they, though struggling till he dies.

The Cracked Bell

'Tis bitter-sweet, when winter nights are long, 
To watch, beside the flames which smoke and twist, 
The distant memories which slowly throng, 
Brought by the chime soft-singing through the mist. 

Happy the sturdy, vigorous-throated bell 
Who, spite of age alert and confident, 
Cries hourly, like some strong old sentinel 
Flinging the ready challenge from his tent. 

For me, my soul is cracked; when, sick with care, 
She strives with songs to people the cold air 
It happens often that her feeble cries 

Mock the harsh rattle of a man who lies 
Wounded, forgotten, 'neath a mound of slain 
And dies, pinned fast, writhing his limbs in vain. 

Spleen

January, irritated with the whole city, 
Pours from his urn great waves of gloomy cold 
On the pale occupants of the nearby graveyard 
And death upon the foggy slums.

My cat seeking a bed on the tiled floor 
Shakes his thin, mangy body ceaselessly; 
The soul of an old poet wanders in the rain-pipe 
With the sad voice of a shivering ghost.

The great bell whines, the smoking log
Accompanies in falsetto the snuffling clock,
While in a deck of cards reeking of filthy scents,

My mortal heritage from some dropsical old woman, 
The handsome knave of hearts and the queen of spades 
Converse sinisterly of their dead love affair.

Spleen

The Month of Rains, incensed at life, outpours 
Out of her urn, a dark chill, like a penance, 
Over the graveyards and their wan, grey tenants 
And folk in foggy suburbs out of doors.

My cat seeks out a litter on the ground 
Twitching her scrawny body flecked with mange. 
The soul of some old poet seems to range 
The gutter, with a chill phantasmal sound.

The big bell tolls: damp hearth-logs seem to mock,
Whistling, the sniffle-snuffle of the clock,
While in the play of odours stale with must,

Reminders of a dropsical old crone, 
The knave of hearts and queen of spades alone 
Darkly discuss a passion turned to dust.

Spleen

Old Pluvius, month of rains, in peevish mood
Pours from his urn chill winter's sodden gloom
On corpses fading in the near graveyard,
On foggy suburbs pours life's tedium.

My cat seeks out a litter on the stones,
Her mangy body turning without rest.
An ancient poet's soul in monotones
Whines in the rain-spouts like a chilblained ghost.

A great bell mourns, a wet log wrapped in smoke
Sings in falsetto to the wheezing clock,
While from a rankly perfumed deck of cards

(A dropsical old crone's fatal bequest)
The Queen of Spades, the dapper Jack of Hearts
Speak darkly of dead loves, how they were lost.

Late January

Pluviose, hating all that lives, and loathing me, 
Distills his cold and gloomy rain and slops it down 
Upon the pallid lodgers in the cemetery 
Next door, and on the people shopping in the town.

My cat, for sheer discomfort, waves a sparsely-furred 
And shabby tail incessantly on the tiled floor; 
And, wandering sadly in the rain-spout, can be heard 
The voice of some dead poet who had these rooms before.

The log is wet, and smokes; its hissing high lament
Mounts to the bronchial clock on the cracked mantel there;
While (heaven knows whose they were -- some dropsical old maid's)

In a soiled pack of cards that reeks of dirty scent, 
The handsome jack of hearts and the worn queen of spades 
Talk in suggestive tones of their old love-affair.

Spleen

The rainy moon of all the world is weary, 
And from its urn a gloomy cold pours down, 
Upon the pallid inmates of the mortuary, 
And on the neighbouring- outskirts of the town. 

My wasted cat, in searching for a litter, 
Bestirs its mangy paws from post to post;
(A poet's soul that wanders in the gutter, 
With the jaded voice of a shiv'ring ghost). 

The smoking pine-log, while the drone laments, 
Accompanies the wheezy pendulum, 
The while amidst a haze of dirty scents, 

-- Those fatal remnants of a sick man's room --
The gallant knave of hearts and queen of spades 
Relate their ancient amorous escapades. 

Spleen

November, vexed with all the capital,
whelms in a death-chill from her gloomy urn
the cold pale dead beneath the graveyard wall,
the death-doomed who in dripping houses yearn.

Grimalkin prowls, a gaunt and scurvy ghoul,
seeking a softer lair for her sojourn;
along the eaves an ancient poet's soul
shivers and wails, a ghost no eyes discern.

the whining church-bell and the log a-sputter
repeat the rheumy clock's falsetto mutter;
while in a pack of cards, scent-filled and vile,

grim relic of a dropsical old maid,
the queen of spades and knave of hearts parade
their dead amours, with many an evil smile.

Spleen

I have more memories than if I'd lived a thousand years.

A heavy chest of drawers cluttered with balance-sheets, 
Processes, love-letters, verses, ballads, 
And heavy locks of hair enveloped in receipts, 
Hides fewer secrets than my gloomy brain. 
It is a pyramid, a vast burial vault 
Which contains more corpses than potter's field.
-- I am a cemetery abhorred by the moon, 
In which long worms crawl like remorse 
And constantly harass my dearest dead. 
I am an old boudoir full of withered roses, 
Where lies a whole litter of old-fashioned dresses, 
Where the plaintive pastels and the pale Bouchers, 
Alone, breathe in the fragrance from an opened phial.

Nothing is so long as those limping days, 
When under the heavy flakes of snowy years 
Ennui, the fruit of dismal apathy, 
Becomes as large as immortality. 
-- Henceforth you are no more, O living matter! 
Than a block of granite surrounded by vague terrors, 
Dozing in the depths of a hazy Sahara 
An old sphinx ignored by a heedless world, 
Omitted from the map, whose savage nature 
Sings only in the rays of a setting sun.

Spleen

I have more memories than had I seen 
Ten centuries. A huge chest that has been 
Stuffed full of writs, bills, verses, balance-sheets 
With golden curls wrapt up in old receipts 
And love-letters -- hides less than my sad brain, 
A pyramid, a vault that must contain 
More corpses than the public charnel stores.

I am a cemetery the moon abhors,
Where, like remorses, the long worms that trail
Always the dearest of my dead assail.
I am a boudoir full of faded roses
Where many an old outmoded dress reposes
And faded pastels and pale Bouchers only
Breathe a scent-flask, long-opened and left lonely...

Nothing can match those limping days for length 
Where under snows of years, grown vast in strength, 
Boredom (of listlessness the pale abortion) 
Of immortality takes the proportion!
-- From henceforth, living matter, you are nought 
But stone surrounded by a dreadful thought: 
Lost in some dim Sahara, an old Sphinx, 
Of whom the world we live in never thinks. 
Lost on the map, it is its surly way 
Only to sing in sunset's fading ray.

Spleen

Were I ten centuries old, could I remember more?

A weighty chest of drawers, crammed with a random store
Of poems, billets-doux, writs, songs, balance sheets,
And heavy skeins of hair rolled up in old receipts,
Hides fewer secrets, surely, than my sorry brain,
A pyramid and vault, whose corridors contain
More corpses than the potter's field, or late or soon.
A graveyard, I, abominated by the moon,
Where, like a viscous worm, remorse thrusts out his head
To strike forever at my most beloved dead.
I am an ancient boudoir filled with faded roses
In which a ruck of long-outmoded gowns reposes,
Where pastels all too sad and Bouchers all too pale
Alone breathe in the scents that uncorked flasks exhale.

Nothing can be so long as days, limping and drear,
Under the heavy flakes of year on snowy year,
When ennui, fruit of dismal incuriosity,
Assumes the fearful scope of immortality.
-- Henceforth you are no more, O mind, O living matter!
Than a cold granite block which unknown terrors spatter,
Dozing deep in the wastes of a Saharan daze,
An ancient Sphinx unknown of our indifferent days,
Omitted from all maps, a lonely savage one
Who can sing only at the setting of the sun.

The Sphinx

I swear to you that if I lived a thousand years 
I could not be more crammed with dubious souvenirs.

There's no old chest of drawers bulging with deeds and bills, 
Love-letters, locks of hair, novels, bad verses, wills, 
That hides so many secrets as my wretched head; -- 
It's like a mausoleum, like a pyramid,
Holding more heaped unpleasant bones than Potter's Field; 
I am a graveyard hated by the moon; revealed 
Never by her blue light are those long worms that force 
Into my dearest dead their blunt snouts of remorse.
--  am an old boudoir, where roses dried and brown 
Have given their dusty odor to the faded gown, 
To the ridiculous hat, doubtless in other days 
So fine, among the wan pastels and pale Bouchers.

Time has gone lame, and limps; and under a thick pall 
Of snow the endless years efface and muffle all; 
Till boredom, fruit of the mind's inert, incurious tree, 
Assumes the shape and size of immortality.

Henceforth, O living matter, you are nothing more 
Than the fixed heart of chaos, soft horror's granite core, 
Than a forgotten Sphinx that in some desert stands, 
Drowsing beneath the heat, half-hidden by the sands, 
Unmarked on any map, -- whose rude and sullen frown 
Lights up a moment only when the sun goes down.

Spleen

I hold more memories than a thousand years.

a chest of drawers crammed full of souvenirs,
accounts and love-notes, warrants, verses -- where
from bills of sale fall coiling locks of hair --
guards not more secrets than my heart of woe,
a burial-vault whose coffins lie arow,
a potters' field that death has filled too soon.
-- I am a graveyard hated by the moon,
where creeping worms trail slowly as remorse,
fiercely destroyed each beloved corpse.

I am a room where faded roses lie
and gowns of perished fashions multiply,
with none but ladies in pastel to share
the musk from some old jar forgotten there.

no days so lame as all the days I know
while, crushed by years of ever-falling snow,
boredom, dull fruitage of my apathy,
waxes as vast as immortality.

henceforth, o living cells, ye sleep, a womb
faint shudders pierce, a cold grey cliff of doom
lost in a misty desert far away,
-- a drowsy sphynx, forgot by all today,
uncharted avatar, whose tameless heart
sounds only when the day's last fires depart.

Spleen

I am like the king of a rainy land, 
Wealthy but powerless, both young and very old, 
Who contemns the fawning manners of his tutors 
And is bored with his dogs and other animals. 
Nothing can cheer him, neither the chase nor falcons, 
Nor his people dying before his balcony. 
The ludicrous ballads of his favorite clown 
No longer smooth the brow of this cruel invalid; 
His bed, adorned with fleurs-de-lis, becomes a grave; 
The lady's maids, to whom every prince is handsome, 
No longer can find gowns shameless enough 
To wring a smile from this young skeleton. 
The alchemist who makes his gold was never able 
To extract from him the tainted element, 
And in those baths of blood come down from Roman times, 
And which in their old age the powerful recall, 
He failed to warm this dazed cadaver in whose veins 
Flows the green water of Lethe in place of blood.

Spleen

I'm like the King of some damp, rainy clime, 
Grown impotent and old before my time, 
Who scorns the bows and scrapings of his teachers 
And bores himself with hounds and all such creatures. 
Naught can amuse him, falcon, steed, or chase: 
No, not the mortal plight of his whole race 
Dying before his balcony. The tune, 
Sung to this tyrant by his pet buffoon, 
Irks him. His couch seems far more like a grave. 
Even the girls, for whom all kings seem brave, 
Can think no toilet up, nor shameless rig, 
To draw a smirk from this funereal prig. 
The sage who makes him gold, could never find 
The baser element that rots his mind. 
Even those blood-baths the old Romans knew 
And later thugs have imitated too, 
Can't warm this skeleton to deeds of slaughter, 
Whose only blood is Lethe's cold, green water.

Spleen

I'm like the king of a rain-country, rich
but sterile, young but with an old wolf's itch,
one who escapes his tutor's monologues,
and kills the day in boredom with his dogs;
nothing cheers him, darts, tennis, falconry,
his people dying by the balcony;
the bawdry of the pet hermaphrodite
no longer gets him through a single night;
his bed of fleur-de-lys becomes a tomb;
even the ladies of the court, for whom
all kings are beautiful, cannot put on
shameful enough dresses for this skeleton;
the scholar who makes his gold cannot invent
washes to cleanse the poisoned element;
even in baths of blood, Rome's legacy,
our tyrants' solace in senility,
he cannot warm up his shot corpse, whose food
is syrup-green Lethean ooze, not blood.

The King of the Rainy Country

A rainy country this, that I am monarch of, -- 
A rich but powerless king, worn-out while yet a boy; 
For whom in vain the falcon falls upon the dove; 
Not even his starving people's groans can give him joy; 
Scorning his tutors, loathing his spaniels, finding stale 
His favorite jester's quips, yawning at the droll tale. 
His bed, for all its <i>fleurs de lis,</i> looks like a tomb; 
The ladies of the court, attending him, to whom 
He, being a prince, is handsome, see him lying there 
Cold as a corpse, and lift their shoulders in despair: 
No garment they take off, no garter they leave on 
Excites the gloomy eye of this young skeleton. 
The royal alchemist, who makes him gold from lead,
The baser element from out the royal head 
Cannot extract; nor can those Roman baths of blood, 
For some so efficacious, cure the hebetude 
Of him, along whose veins, where flows no blood at all, 
For ever the slow waters of green Lethe crawl.

Spleen

I'm like a king of rainy lands and cold
-- wealthy, but impotent: still young, but old --
who, scornful of his tutors' bows, prefers
his hounds and boredom to such grovellers.
nor stag nor falcon rouse his apathy,
nor starving subjects 'neath his balcony.
his favourite jester's wildest ballads now
no longer clear his cruel, sickened brow;
his royal bed's a coffin drowned in care,
and court-ladies, to whom all kings are fair,
-- seeking a smile from that young skeleton -- 
no longer find one shameless robe to don.
nor can the sage who makes him gold succeed
in purging him of Death's corruptive seed,
nor in the baths of blood the Romans knew,
wherein the aged rich their strength renew,
learn how to warm that cold numb corpse, through whose
dull veins, for blood, green Lethe's waters ooze.

Spleen

I'm like some king in whose corrupted veins
Flows aged blood; who rules a land of rains;
Who, young in years, is old in all distress;
Who flees good counsel to find weariness
Among his dogs and playthings, who is stirred
Neither by hunting-hound nor hunting-bird;
Whose weary face emotion moves no more
E'en when his people die before his door.
His favourite Jester's most fantastic wile
Upon that sick, cruel face can raise no smile;
The courtly dames, to whom all kings are good,
Can lighten this young skeleton's dull mood
No more with shameless toilets. In his gloom
Even his lilied bed becomes a tomb.
The sage who takes his gold essays in vain
To purge away the old corrupted strain,
His baths of blood, that in the days of old
The Romans used when their hot blood grew cold,
Will never warm this dead man's bloodless pains,
For green Lethean water fills his veins.

Spleen

When the low, heavy sky weighs like a lid 
On the groaning spirit, victim of long ennui, 
And from the all-encircling horizon 
Spreads over us a day gloomier than the night;

When the earth is changed into a humid dungeon, 
In which Hope like a bat 
Goes beating the walls with her timid wings 
And knocking her head against the rotten ceiling;

When the rain stretching out its endless train
Imitates the bars of a vast prison
And a silent horde of loathsome spiders
Comes to spin their webs in the depths of our brains,

All at once the bells leap with rage 
And hurl a frightful roar at heaven, 
Even as wandering spirits with no country 
Burst into a stubborn, whimpering cry.

-- And without drums or music, long hearses 
Pass by slowly in my soul; Hope, vanquished, 
Weeps, and atrocious, despotic Anguish 
On my bowed skull plants her black flag.

Spleen

When the cold heavy sky weighs like a lid 
On spirits whom eternal boredom grips, 
And the wide ring of the horizon's hid 
In daytime darker than the night's eclipse:

When the world seems a dungeon, damp and small, 
Where hope flies like a bat, in circles reeling, 
Beating his timid wings against the wall 
And dashing out his brains against the ceiling:

When trawling rains have made their steel-grey fibres 
Look like the grilles of some tremendous jail, 
And a whole nation of disgusting spiders 
Over our brains their dusty cobwebs trail:

Suddenly bells are fiercely clanged about
And hurl a fearsome howl into the sky
Like spirits from their country hunted out
Who've nothing else to do but shriek and cry -- 

Then long processions without fifes or drums 
Wind slowly through my soul. Hope, weeping, bows 
To conquest. And atrocious Anguish comes 
To plant his black flag on my drooping brows.

When the Low, Heavy Sky

When the low, heavy sky weighs like the giant lid 
Of a great pot upon the spirit crushed by care, 
And from the whole horizon encircling us is shed 
A day blacker than night, and thicker with despair;

When Earth becomes a dungeon, where the timid bat 
Called Confidence, against the damp and slippery walls 
Goes beating his blind wings, goes feebly bumping at 
The rotted, moldy ceiling, and the plaster falls;

When, dark and dropping straight, the long lines of the rain 
Like prison-bars outside the window cage us in; 
And silently, about the caught and helpless brain, 
We feel the spider walk, and test the web, and spin;

Then all the bells at once ring out in furious clang, 
Bombarding heaven with howling, horrible to hear, 
Like lost and wandering souls, that whine in shrill harangue 
Their obstinate complaints to an unlistening ear.

-- And a long line of hearses, with neither dirge nor drums, 
Begins to cross my soul. Weeping, with steps that lag, 
Hope walks in chains; and Anguish, after long wars, becomes 
Tyrant at last, and plants on me his inky flag.

Spleen

when low skies weightier than a coffin-lid
cast on the moaning soul their weary blight,
and from the whole horizon's murky grid
its grey light drips more dismal than the night;

when earth's a dungeon damp whose chill appals,
in which -- a fluttering bat -- my Hope, alone
buffets with timid wing the mouldering walls
and beats her head against the dome of stone;

when close as prison-bars, from overhead,
the clouds let fall the curtain of the rains,
and voiceless hordes of spiders come, to spread
their infamous cobwebs through our darkened brains,

explosively the bells begin to ring,
hurling their frightful clangour toward the sky,
as homeless spirits lost and wandering
might raise their indefatigable cry;

and ancient hearses through my soul advance
muffled and slow; my Hope, now pitiful,
weeps her defeat, and conquering Anguish plants
his great black banner on my cowering skull.

Spleen

When the low heavy sky weighs like a lid 
Upon the spirit aching for the light, 
And all the wide horizon's line is hid 
By a black day sadder than any night; 

When the changed earth is but a dungeon dank 
Where batlike Hope goes blindly fluttering 
And, striking wall and roof and mouldered plank, 
Bruises his tender head and timid wing; 

When like grim prison-bars stretch down the thin, 
Straight, rigid pillars of the endless rain, 
And the dumb throngs of infamous spiders spin 
Their meshes in the caverns of the brain; -- 

Suddenly, bells leap forth into the air, 
Hurling a hideous uproar to the sky 
As 'twere a band of homeless spirits who fare 
Through the strange heavens, wailing stubbornly. 

And hearses, without drum or instrument, 
File slowly through my soul; crushed, sorrowful, 
Weeps Hope, and Grief, fierce and omnipotent, 
Plants his black banner on my drooping skull. 

Spleen

When the low and heavy sky presses like a lid 
On the groaning heart a prey to slow cares, 
And when from a horizon holding the whole orb 
There is cast at us a dark sky more sad than night;

When earth is changed to a damp dungeon, 
Where Hope, like a bat, 
Flees beating the walls with its timorous wings, 
And knocking its head on the rotting ceilings;

When the rain spreads out vast trails
Like the bars of a huge prison,
And when, like sordid spiders, silent people stretch
Threads to the depths of our brains,

Suddenly the bells jump furiously 
And hurl to the sky a horrible shriek, 
Like some wandering landless spirits 
Starting an obstinate complaint.

 -- And long hearses, with no drums, no music, 
File slowly through my soul: Hope, 
Conquered, cries, and despotic atrocious Agony 
Plants on my bent skull its flag of black.

Mist and Rain

O ends of autumn, winters, springtimes drenched with mud, 
Seasons that lull to sleep! I love you, I praise you 
For enfolding my heart and mind thus 
In a misty shroud and a filmy tomb.

On that vast plain where the cold south wind plays, 
Where in the long, dark nights the weather-cock grows hoarse, 
My soul spreads wide its raven wings 
More easily than in the warm springtide.

Nothing is sweeter to a gloomy heart
On which the hoar-frost has long been falling,
Than the permanent aspect of your pale shadows,

O wan seasons, queens of our clime
-- Unless it be to deaden suffering, side by side 
In a casual bed, on a moonless night.

Mist and Rain

O Autumns, Winters, Springs! Seasons of mire! 
Soul-drowsing times! I love you. Take my praise 
For shrouding thus my heart and brain entire 
In a vague tomb and winding-sheet of haze.

Through the long nights when the south-wester swings 
The rusty vanes that shriek upon the towers, 
My soul can fully stretch its raven wings 
More easily than in the warmer hours.

Nothing is sweeter to funereal hearts 
On whom the frost of ages has been laid -- 
Wan seasons, when you queen it round these parts, -- 

Than the eternal sight of your pale shade: 
Unless on moonless midnights, pair by pair, 
To lull, upon chance beds, our hearts' despair.

Mists and Rains

O ends of autumn, winters, springtimes deep in mud, 
Seasons of drowsiness, -- my love and gratitude 
I give you, that have wrapped with mist my heart and brain 
As with a shroud, and shut them in a tomb of rain.

In this wide land when coldly blows the bleak south-west 
And weathervanes at night grow hoarse on the house-crest, 
Better than in the time when green things bud and grow 
My mounting soul spreads wide its black wings of a crow.

The heart filled up with gloom, and to the falling sleet
Long since accustomed, finds no other thing more sweet -- 
O dismal seasons, queens of our sad climate crowned -- 

Than to remain always in your pale shadows drowned; 
(Unless it be, some dark night, kissing an unseen head, 
To rock one's pain to sleep upon a hazardous bed.)

Mists and Rains

O last of Autumn and Winter -- steeped in haze, 
O sleepy seasons! you I love and praise, 
Because around my heart and brain you twine 
A misty winding-sheet and a nebulous shrine. 

On that great plain, where frigid blasts abound, 
Where through the nights, so long, the vane whirls round, 
My soul, more free than in the springtime soft, 
Will stretch her raven wings and soar aloft, 

Unto an heart with gloomy things replete, 
On which remain the frosts of former Times, 
O pallid seasons, mistress of our climes 

As your pale shadows -- nothing is so sweet, 
Unless it be, on a moonless night a-twain, 
On some chance couch to soothe to sleep our Pain. 

Brumes et pluies

o muddy Aprils, autumns, winters too!
o drowsy seasons! love and praise to you
I bring, for over heart and brain ye throw
your misty shrouds and tombs to hide me so.

vast plain, where Boreas mocks her brawling crew,
hoarse weather-vanes which creak the whole night through, 
ye rouse me more than May, for now I go
soaring on wider condor wings of woe.

wan months of mist which in the north prevail,
no boon so dear to souls whereon the snows
forever fall, and shades of death enclose,

as your unending twilight cold and pale,
-- unless, some moonless eve should find us, twain,
creeping in beds of chance to lull our pain.

Mist And Rain

Autumns and winters, springs of mire and rain,
Seasons of sleep, I sing your praises loud,
For thus I love to wrap my heart and brain
In some dim tomb beneath a vapoury shroud

In the wide plain where revels the cold wind,
Through long nights when the weathercock whirls round,
More free than in warm summer day my mind
Lifts wide her raven pinions from the ground.

Unto a heart filled with funereal things
That since old days hoar frosts have gathered on,
Naught is more sweet, O pallid, queenly springs,

Than the long pageant of your shadows wan,
Unless it be on moonless eves to weep
On some chance bed and rock our griefs to sleep.

Beyond Redemption

I

An Idea, a Form, a Being 
Which left the azure sky and fell 
Into a leaden, miry Styx 
That no eye in Heaven can pierce;

An Angel, imprudent voyager
Tempted by love of the deformed,
In the depths of a vast nightmare
Flailing his arms like a swimmer,

And struggling, mortal agony! 
Against a gigantic whirlpool 
That sings constantly like madmen 
And pirouettes in the darkness;

An unfortunate, enchanted, 
Outstretched hands groping futilely, 
Looking for the light and the key, 
To flee a place filled with reptiles;

A damned soul descending endless stairs
Without banisters, without light,
On the edge of a gulf of which
The odor reveals the humid depth,

Where slimy monsters are watching, 
Whose eyes, wide and phosphorescent, 
Make the darkness darker still 
And make visible naught but themselves;

A ship caught in the polar sea 
As though in a snare of crystal, 
Seeking the fatal strait through which 
It came into that prison;

-- Patent symbols, perfect picture 
Of an irremediable fate 
Which makes one think that the Devil 
Always does well whatever he does!

II

Somber and limpid tete-a-tete -- 
A heart become its own mirror!
Well of Truth, clear and black,
Where a pale star flickers,

A hellish, ironic beacon, 
Torch of satanical blessings, 
Sole glory and only solace
-- The consciousness of doing evil.

The Irremediable

I

A Form, Idea, or Essence, chased 
Out of the azure sky, and shot 
Into a leaden Styx where not 
A star can pierce the muddy waste:

An angel, rash explorer, who,
Tempted by love of strange deformity,
Caught in a nightmare of enormity,
Fights like a swimmer, wrestling through

A monstrous whorl of eddying spume, 
In deathly anguish, from him flinging 
The wave that, like an idiot singing, 
Goes pirouetting through the gloom:

A wretch enchanted, who, to flee
A den of serpents, gropes about 
In desperation vain, without 
Discovering a match or key:

A damned soul, who, with no lamp,
Stands by a gulf, whose humid scent
Betrays the depth of the descent
Of endless stairs without a ramp,

Where slimy monsters watch the track 
Whose eyeballs phosphoresce and glow 
Only to make the night more black 
And nought except themselves to show:

A vessel that the pole betrays, 
Caught in a crystal trap all round, 
And seeking by what fatal sound 
It ever entered such a maze: -- 

Clear emblems! measuring the level 
Of irremediable dooms, 
Which make us see bow well the Devil 
Performs whatever he presumes!

II

Strange tete-a-tete! the heart, its own
Mirror, its own confession hears!
Deep well where Truth is trembling shown
And like a livid star appears,

Ironic beacon and infernal
Torch of satanic grace, but still
Sole glory and relief eternal,
-- Conscience that operates in Ill!

The Irremediable

I

A Dream, a Form, a Creature, late
Fallen from azure realms, and sped
Into some Styx of mud and lead
No eye from heaven can penetrate;

An angel, rash wanderer, who craves
To look upon deformity,
The vast nightmare's gulf to try
As swimmer struggling with the waves,

And battling (anguish fierce and stark!)
Against gigantic whirlpools
That, singing, go like mad fools
Pirouetting in the dark;

One spellbound in sorcery,
Groping vainly as he makes
To flee a place alive with snakes,
Seeking the candle and the key;

A lost and lampless soul descending,
Within a gulf whose foetid scent
Betrays its damp and deep extent,
A railless staircase never ending,

Where clammy monsters guard the way,
Whose great eyes' phosphoric light
Makes even blacker still the night,
And nothing but themselves betray;

A vessel icebound at the pole,
As in a crystal trap secure,
Seeking the fatal aperture
By which it reached that prison goal:

-- Perfect emblems, clear and true,
Of irremediable Fate,
They make us think the Devil's hate
Does well whatever he will do!

II

The dialogue is dark and clear
When a heart becomes its mirror!
Black well of Truth, but none is clearer,
Where that livid star appears,

That ironic and primaeval
Beacon, torch of Satan's grace,
Our sole glory and our solace -- 
Consciousness in doing Evil !

To an Auburn-Haired Beggar-Maid

Pale girl with the auburn hair,
Whose dress through its tears and holes
Reveals your poverty
And your beauty,

For me, an ailing poet,
Your body, young and sickly,
Spotted with countless freckles,
Has its sweetness.

You wear with more elegance
Your wooden clogs than the queen
In a romance her sandals
Trimmed with velvet.

Instead of a scanty rag,
Let a glittering court dress
Trail with its long, rustling folds
Over your heels;

In place of stockings with holes, 
Let, for the eyes of roues, 
A golden poniard glisten
In your garter;

Let ill-tied ribbons give way 
And unveil, so we may sin, 
Your two lovely breasts, radiant
As shining eyes;

Let your arms demand entreating 
To uncover your body 
And repel with saucy blows
Roguish fingers,

Pearls of the finest water, 
Sonnets by Master Belleau
Constantly offered by swains
Held in love's chains,

Plebeian versifiers 
Offering first books to you 
And ogling your slippered foot
From under the stair;

Many a page fond of love's chance, 
Many a Ronsard and lord 
For amusement would spy on
Your chilly hut!

You could count in your beds
More kisses than fleurs-de-lis
And subject to your power
Many Valois!

-- However, you go begging 
Some moldy refuse lying 
On the steps of some Vefour
At the crossroads;

You go furtively eyeing 
Baubles at twenty-nine sous, 
Of which I can't, oh! pardon! 
Make you a gift.

Go, with no more adornment, 
Perfume or pearl or diamond, 
Than your slender nudity, 
O my beauty!

The Red-Haired Beggar Girl

White girl with flame-red hair, 
Whose garments, here and there, 
Give poverty to view, 
And beauty too.

To me, poor puny poet, 
Your body, as you show it, 
With freckles on your arms, 
Has yet its charms.

You wear with prouder mien 
Than in Romance a queen 
Her velvet buskins could -- 
Your clogs of wood.

In place of tatters short 
Let some rich robe of court 
Swirl with its silken wheels 
After your heels:

In place of stockings holed 
A dagger made of gold, 
To light the lecher's eye, 
Flash on your thigh:

Let ribbons slip their bows 
And for our sins disclose 
A breast whose radiance vies 
Even with your eyes.

To show them further charms
Let them implore your arms,
And these, rebuking, humble
Fingers that fumble

With proferred pearls aglow 
And sonnets of Belleau, 
Which, fettered by your beauty,
They yield in duty.

Riffraff of scullion-rhymers 
Would dedicate their primers 
Under the stairs to view
Only your shoe.

Each page-boy lucky-starred, 
Each marquis, each Ronsard 
Would hang about your bower
To while an hour.

You'd count, among your blisses, 
Than lilies far more kisses, 
And boast, among your flames,
Some royal names.

Yet now your beauty begs 
For scraps on floors, and dregs 
Else destined to the gutter,
As bread and butter.

You eye, with longing tense, 
Cheap gauds for thirty cents, 
Which, pardon me, these days
I cannot raise.

No scent, or pearl, or stone, 
But nothing save your own 
Thin nudity for dower,
Pass on, my flower!

To a Brown Beggar-Maid

White maiden with the russet hair,
Whose garments, through their holes, declare
That poverty is part of you,
And beauty too.

To me, a sorry bard and mean,
Your youthful beauty, frail and lean,
With summer freckles here and there,
Is sweet and fair.

Your sabots tread the roads of chance,
And not one queen of old romance
Carried her velvet shoes and lace
With half your grace.

In place of tatters far too short
Let the proud garments worn at Court
Fall down with rustling fold and pleat
About your feet;

In place of stockings, worn and old,
Let a keen dagger all of gold
Gleam in your garter for the eyes
Of roues wise;

Let ribbons carelessly untied
Reveal to us the radiant pride
Of your white bosom purer far
Than any star;

Let your white arms uncovered shine,
Polished and smooth and half divine;
And let your elfish fingers chase
With riotous grace

The purest pearls that softly glow,
The sweetest sonnets of Belleau,
Offered by gallants ere they fight
For your delight;

And many fawning rhymers who
Inscribe their first thin book to you
Will contemplate upon the stair
Your slipper fair;

And many a page who plays at cards,
And many lords and many bards,
Will watch your going forth, and burn
For your return;

And you will count before your glass
More kisses than the lily has;
And more than one Valois will sigh
When you pass by.

But meanwhile you are on the tramp,
Begging your living in the damp,
Wandering mean streets and alleys o'er,
From door to door;

And shilling bangles in a shop
Cause you with eager eyes to stop,
And I, alas, have not a sou
To give to you.

Then go, with no more ornament,
Pearl, diamond, or subtle scent,
Than your own fragile naked grace
And lovely face.

To a Red-Haired Beggar Girl

Little white girl with red hair, 
The holes in your frock
Show poverty
And beauty,

For me, a poor poet, 
Your young and ailing body, 
Spotted with, freckles,
Has its sweetness.

You carry more gallantly, 
Than can a queen of fiction 
Her high-boots of velvet,
Your heavy clogs.

In place of rags too short for you, 
May a fine court costume 
Be drawn in blustering, long folds
At your heels;

In place of stockings in holes, 
May a dagger of gold 
Glitter for the eyes of rakes
On your leg;

May barely fastened knots 
Reveal for our sinning 
Your lovely breasts, radiant
As two eyes;

May, to undress yourself,
Your arms require coaxing
And may they archly repel
Mischievous fingers,

May pearls of finest water, 
Sonnets by Belleau, 
Be ceaselessly proffered
By your enslaved lovers,

Trains of servant rhymers, 
Dedicating first lines to you 
And watching your slipper
Under the staircase,

Many a flunkey struck at random, 
Many a lord and many a Ronsard 
Would spy to seduce it
Your tender retreat!

You would count more kisses 
Than lilies in your beds 
And you would hold in sway
More than one Valois!

 -- Meanwhile you go begging 
Some old rubbish lying 
On the threshold of some
Vulgar Vefour;

You go gaping past your shoulder 
At twenty-nine sou jewels 
Of which, I cannot, I am sorry,
Make a gift to you.

Go then, without other ornament, 
Perfume, pearls or diamonds, 
Than your emaciated nudity,
O my beauty!

Gambling

In faded armchairs aged courtesans, 
Pale, eyebrows penciled, with alluring fatal eyes, 
Smirking and sending forth from wizened ears 
A jingling sound of metal and of gems;

Around the gaming tables faces without lips, 
Lips without color and jaws without teeth, 
Fingers convulsed with a hellborn fever 
Searching empty pockets and fluttering bosoms;

Under dirty ceilings a row of bright lusters 
And enormous oil-lamps casting their rays 
On the tenebrous brows of distinguished poets 
Who come there to squander the blood they have sweated;

That is the black picture that in a dream one night
I saw unfold before my penetrating eyes.
I saw myself at the back of that quiet den,
Leaning on my elbows, cold, silent, envying,

Envying the stubborn passion of those people, 
The dismal merriment of those old prostitutes, 
All blithely selling right before my eyes, 
One his ancient honor, another her beauty!

My heart took fright at its envy of so many 
Wretches running fiercely to the yawning chasm, 
Who, drunk with their own blood, would prefer, in a word, 
Suffering to death and hell to nothingness!

The Gamblers

In faded armchairs, harlots of past years 
Pale, with false eyebrows, wheedling, fatal eyes, 
And weird, affected airs, clink from thin ears 
A feeble sound, where tin with crystal vies.

Round the green tables, faces without lips,
Lips without colour, jaws their teeth surviving,
And fingers which a hellish fever grips
Convulsively in breasts and pockets diving

Under the dirty ceiling, lustres flame 
And chandeliers, that blaze without remittance 
On shady brows of poets dear to fame, 
Who come to waste their sorely-sweated pittance.

Such was the picture, in nocturnal dreaming, 
I saw unfurled to my clairvoyant eye. 
In that grim vault, one form on elbows leaning,
Unspeaking, cold, and envious -- was I! -- 

Yes! envying, for their all-tenacious passion, 
These raddled tarts in their funereal glee, 
Who trafficked there, in such a merry fashion, 
Dead virtue and lost beauty on the spree.

My heart was chilled with fear at envying
Wretches who, headlong, rush to be destroyed,
And, drunk with their own blood, seek anything -- 
Hell, death, or torture -- rather than the Void!

The Gaming Room

The armchairs of worn satin; the aged courtesans, 
Livid and rouged, their eyes relentless, their eyebrows blacked, 
Jingling eternally from their withered ears, to attract 
Attention, their huge earrings, and ogling behind their fans;

The long green table, the rows of lipless faces, the lips 
Drained of all color; the gaping, toothless mouths; the unrest 
Of hundreds of white nervous fingers, stacking the chips, 
Or searching the empty pocket, the convulsive breast;

The dirty ceiling, the blaze of crystal chandeliers, 
The low-hung lamps illumining with a crude glare 
The ravaged brows of poets, the scars of grenadiers, 
Who come to risk the earnings of their lifeblood there.

-- Such is the lurid spectacle that with calm dread
I saw as in a melancholy dream unroll:
Myself, too, sitting in a deserted corner, my head
Propped in my hands, mute, weary, jealous to my soul,

Jealous of all that rabble, of the lust of it, 
The terrible gaiety of those old whores, the smell 
And noise of life, for which they frantically sell 
Some remnant of their honor, their beauty, or their wit.

And suddenly I was affrighted at my own heart, to feel
Such envy of all men running wildly and out of breath
Nowhere, and who prefer, like those around that wheel,
Pain, horror, crime, insanity -- anything -- to death!

The Gaming Table

On tarnished chairs the pale old harlots quiver,
Sly fatal eyes under the eyebrows painted
Dreadfully mincing : as their lean ears shiver
With hateful jewelled peal the air is tainted.

Round the green tables a frieze of lipless faces,
Of blue-cold lips, if lips, of toothless gums,
And fingers, fevered with Hell's last disgraces,
Fumbling in pockets -- or in deliriums.

Dull chandeliers in the soot-mottled ceiling
And swollen lamps pick out with violet
Shadow the brows of famous poets, reeling
To waste the guerdon of art's blood-stained sweat.

My eye, turned inward, darkly can discern
This Hellish picture self-distorted thus,
The while I see in yonder taciturn
Corner myself, cold, mute -- and envious.

Envying these creatures their tenacious lust,
These rattling skeletons their deadly mirth,
Envying all of those who gaily thrust
Honour or beauty to rot beneath the earth.

Envious, my heart! O dark and dreadful word!
When these with passion their bright destruction bless,
Who, drunk with the pulse of their own blood, preferred
Deep pain to death and Hell to nothingness.

Twilight

Behold the sweet evening, friend of the criminal; 
It comes like an accomplice, stealthily; the sky 
Closes slowly like an immense alcove, 
And impatient man turns into a beast of prey. 
O evening, kind evening, desired by him 
Whose arms can say, without lying: "Today 
We labored!" -- It is the evening that comforts 
Those minds that are consumed by a savage sorrow, 
The obstinate scholar whose head bends with fatigue 
And the bowed laborer who returns to his bed.

Meanwhile in the atmosphere malefic demons 
Awaken sluggishly, like businessmen, 
And take flight, bumping against porch roofs and shutters. 
Among the gas flames worried by the wind 
Prostitution catches alight in the streets; 
Like an ant-hill she lets her workers out; 
Everywhere she blazes a secret path, 
Like an enemy who plans a surprise attack; 
She moves in the heart of the city of mire 
Like a worm that steals from Man what he eats. 
Here and there one hears food sizzle in the kitchens, 
The theaters yell, the orchestras moan;

The gambling dens, where games of chance delight, 
Fill up with whores and cardsharps, their accomplices; 
The burglars, who know neither respite nor mercy, 
Are soon going to begin their work, they also, 
And quietly force open cash-boxes and doors 
To enjoy life awhile and dress their mistresses.

Meditate, O my soul, in this solemn moment, 
And close your ears to this uproar; 
It is now that the pains of the sick grow sharper! 
Somber Night grabs them by the throat; they reach the end 
Of their destinies and go to the common pit; 
The hospitals are filled with their sighs. -- More than one 
Will come no more to get his fragrant soup 
By the fireside, in the evening, with a loved one.

However, most of them have never known 
The sweetness of a home, have never lived!

Evening Twilight

Delightful evening, partner of the crook, 
Steals in, wolf-padded, like a complice: look: 
Heaven, like a garret, closes to the day, 
And Man, impatient, turns a beast of prey.

Sweet evening, loved by those whose arms can tell, 
Without a lie, "Today we've laboured well:" 
Sweet evening, it is she who brings relief 
To men with souls devoured by one fierce grief, 
Obstinate thinkers drowsy in the head, 
And toil-bent workmen groping to their bed.

But insalubrious demons of the airs, 
Like business people, wake to their affairs 
And, flying, knock, like bats, on walls and shutters.
Now Prostitution lights up in the gutters 
Across the glimmering jets the wind torments. 
Like a huge ant-hive it unseals its vents. 
On every side it weaves its hidden tracks 
Like enemies preparing night-attacks. 
It squirms within the City's breast of mire, 
A worm that steals the food that men desire.

One hears the kitchens hissing here and there, 
Operas squealing, orchestras ablare. 
Cheap tables d'hote, where gaming lights the eyes, 
Fill up with whores, and sharpers, their allies: 
And thieves, whose office knows no truce nor rest, 
Will shortly now start working, too, with zest, 
Gently unhinging doors and forcing tills, 
To live some days and buy their sweethearts frills.

Collect yourself, my soul, in this grave hour 
And shut your ears against the din and stour. 
It is the hour when sick men's pains increase. 
Death grips them by the throat, and soon they cease 
Their destined task, to find the common pit. 
The ward is filled with sighings. Out of it 
Not all return the scented soup to taste, 
Warm at the hearthside, by some loved-one placed.

But then how few among them can recall 
Joys of the hearth, or ever lived at all!

Comes The Charming Evening

Comes the charming evening, the criminal's friend,
Comes conspirator-like on soft wolf tread.
Like a large alcove the sky slowly closes,
And man approaches his bestial metamorphosis.

To arms that have laboured, evening is kind enough,
Easing the strain of sinews that have borne their rough
Share of the burden; it is evening that relents
To those whom an angry obsession daily haunts.
The solitary student now raises a burdened head
And the back that bent daylong sinks into its bed.
Meanwhile darkness dawns, filled with demon familiars

Who rouse, reluctant as business-men, to their affairs,
Their ponderous flight rattling the shutters and blinds.
Against the lamplight, whose shivering is the wind's,
Prostitution spreads its light and life in the streets :
Like an anthill opening its issues it penetrates
Mysteriously everywhere by its own occult route;
Like an enemy mining the foundations of a fort,
Or a worm in an apple, eating what all should eat,
It circulates securely in the city's clogged heart.
The heat and hiss of kitchens can be felt here and there,
The panting of heavy bands, the theatres' clamour.
Cheap hotels, the haunts of dubious solaces,
Are filling with tarts, and crooks, their sleek accomplices,
And thieves, who have never heard of restraint or remorse,
Return now to their work as a matter of course,
Forcing safes behind carefully re-locked doors,
To get a few days' living and put clothes on their whores.

Collect yourself, my soul, this is a serious moment,
Pay no further attention to the noise and movement.
This is the hour when the pains of the sick sharpen,
Night touches them like a torturer, pushes them to the open
Trapdoor over the gulf that is all too common.
Their groans overflow the hospital. More than one
Will not come back to taste the soup's familiar flavour
In the evening, with some friendly soul, by his own fire.

Indeed, many a one has never even known
The hearth's warm charm. Pity such a one.

Le Crepuscule du soir

'tis witching night, the criminal's ally;
it comes accomplice-like, wolf-soft; the sky
slowly is closing every giant door,
and man the rebel turns a beast once more.

o Night, delicious Night, they sigh for thee
-- all those whose arms complain, and truly: we
have toiled today! her solace and her peace
Night brings to souls where cankering woes increase
-- the self-willed scholar, nodding drowsily,
the workman bowed and hurrying bedward, free.
but now the evil demons of the air
wake heavily, like folk with many a care,
and, soaring, dash their heads on wall or blind.
among the gas-jets flickering in the wind
from every door, a hive that swarms a new,
pale Prostitution lights each avenue;
clearing her secret ways where lechers crawl
as might a foe who undermines a wall;
gorging on what we need, she nightly squirms
across the mire and darkness, like the worms.
the kitchens rattle 'round us everywhere,
playhouses roar and bands of music blare,
swindlers and bawds ally themselves to fleece
in wine shops, those who seek the cards' caprice,
while thieves, who truce nor mercy never knew,
will very soon resume their struggles too,
and gently force the door where treasure is
to feed themselves and dress their mistresses.

awake, my soul, in this grave hour of sin
and close thin ear to all its clamorous din.
now is the time when sick men's woes increase!
the murky night is throttling them; -- they cease
to breathe, and sink into the Gulf, undone.
their groanings fill the poor house. -- more than one 
will seek no more at dusk his savoury bowl
beside the hearth, near some beloved soul.

and most of these have never known the call
of home, nor had a hearth, nor lived at all!

Evening Twilight

Now is the graceful evening, friend of the criminal; 
Now it comes like an accomplice, stealthily; the sky 
Closes slowly like a gigantic bedroom, 
And Man, impatient, changes to wild beast.

O evening, lovable eveningtime, longed for by him 
Whose arms can truthfully say: Today 
We have worked! -- It is evening that lightens 
Spirits consumed by a fierce sorrow, 
The stubborn savant whose forehead grows heavy, 
And the bent laborer gaining again his bed.

Meanwhile unhealthy demons heavily awake,
Like business men, in the atmosphere,
And fly and strike the shutters and the awning.
Across those lights the wind tortures
Prostitution is ignited in the streets;
Like an ant-hill she opens her escapes,
Spawning all over a secret path,
Like an enemy's sudden attack;
She stirs on the breast of the city of dung
Like a worm that steals his meals from Man.
Here and there one hears kitchens hissing,
The screaming of theatres and orchestras roaring;
The plain tables, where gambling throws its pleasures,
Fill up with bawds and cheats, accomplices,
And thieves, who know no truce nor grace,
Soon go to get to work, they also,
Depart to force gently safes and doors
For a few days' living and to clothe their mistresses.

Reflect, O my soul, in this most solemn time,
And close your ears to this roar.
It is the hour when the sorrows of the ill are sharpened.
Dark Night grips them by the throat; they fulfill

Their fate and move into the common whirlpool; 
The hospitals are full of their sighing.  -- More than one 
Will no more come back to seek the perfumed soup, 
Beside the fire, at night, by a beloved soul.

Still most, most of them have never known 
Home's sweetness nor have they really lived.

Dawn

They were sounding reveille in the barracks' yards, 
And the morning wind was blowing on the lanterns.

It was the hour when swarms of harmful dreams 
Make the sun-tanned adolescents toss in their beds; 
When, like a bloody eye that twitches and rolls, 
The lamp makes a red splash against the light of day; 
When the soul within the heavy, fretful body 
Imitates the struggle of the lamp and the sun. 
Like a tear-stained face being dried by the breeze, 
The air is full of the shudders of things that flee, 
And man is tired of writing and woman of making love.

Here and there the houses were beginning to smoke. 
The ladies of pleasure, with eyelids yellow-green 
And mouths open, were sleeping their stupefied sleep; 
The beggar-women, their breasts hanging thin and cold, 
Were blowing on their fires, blowing on their fingers. 
It was the hour when amid poverty and cold 
The pains of women in labor grow more cruel; 
The cock's crow in the distance tore the foggy air 
Like a sob stifled by a bloody froth;

The buildings were enveloped in a sea of mist, 
And in the charity-wards, the dying 
Hiccupped their death-sobs at uneven intervals. 
The rakes were going home, exhausted by their work.

The dawn, shivering in her green and rose garment, 
Was moving slowly along the deserted Seine, 
And somber Paris, the industrious old man, 
Was rubbing his eyes and gathering up his tools.

Morning Twilight

Reveille in the barracks and the camps. 
The wind of morning blew upon the lamps. 
It was the hour when evil dreams in swarms 
On pillows twist brown, adolescent forms: 
When like a bleeding eye that's twitched with pain 
Each lantern smudged the day with crimson stain: 
The soul, against its body's weight of brawn, 
Lay struggling, like the lanterns with the dawn: 
Like a sad face whose tears the breezes dry 
The air grew tremulous with things that fly, 
And women tired of love, and men of writing.

The chimneys, here and there, showed fires were lighting. 
Women of pleasure, slumber to be-slut, 
Lay open-mouthed with livid eyelids shut. 
Dangling thin dugs, cold pauper-women blew 
Upon the embers and their fingers too. 
It was the hour when, what with cold and squalor, 
Women in labour aggravate their dolour, 
And like a sob, choked short with bloody froth, 
The cock-crow tore the foggy air as cloth.

Like seas the mists round every building poured 
While agonising patients in the ward, 
In broken hiccoughs, rattled out their lives: 
And worn-out rakes reeled homeward to their wives. 
Aurora, in a shift of rose and green, 
Came shivering down the Seine's deserted scene 
And Paris, as he rubbed his eyes, began 
To sort his tools, laborious old man.

Dawn

Outside the barracks now the bugle called, and woke 
The morning wind, which rose, making the lanterns smoke.

It was that hour when tortured dreams of stealthy joys 
Twist in their beds the thin brown bodies of growing boys; 
When, like a blood-shot eye that blinks and looks away, 
The lamp still burns, and casts a red stain on the day; 
When the soul, pinned beneath the body's weight and brawn, 
Strives, as the lamplight strives to overcome the dawn; 
The air, like a sad face whose tears the breezes dry, 
Is tremulous with countless things about to die; 
And men grow tired of writing, and women of making love.

Blue smoke was curling now from the cold chimneys of 
A house or two; with heavy lids, mouths open wide, 
Prostitutes slept their slumber dull and stupefied; 
While laborers' wives got up, with sucked-out breasts, and stood 
Blowing first on their hands, then on the flickering wood. 
It was that hour when cold, and lack of things they need, 
Combine, and women in childbirth have it hard indeed.

Like a sob choked by frothy hemorrhage, somewhere 
Far-off a sudden cock-crow tore the misty air; 
A sea of fog rolled in, effacing roofs and walls; 
The dying, that all night in the bare hospitals 
Had fought for life, grew weaker, rattled, and fell dead; 
And gentlemen, debauched and drunk, swayed home to bed.

Aurora now in a thin dress of green and rose, 
With chattering teeth advanced. Old somber Paris rose, 
Picked up its tools, and, over the deserted Seine, 
Yawning, rubbing its eyes, slouched forth to work again.

Morning Twilight

Reveille rang thinly from across a barrack square,
And a breath of morning troubled the street-lamps' stare.

It was that hour of the night when guilty dreams
Rise from brown, restless adolescents in swarms,
When, quaking and cringing like a blood-shot eye,
The lamp stains the coming day with its dye;
When under the body's reluctant, stubborn weight
The soul, like the lamp, renews its unequal fight;
When the air shivers as if to escape, to efface
Itself in furtive breezes drying a tear-stung face;
When woman is sick of love, as the writer of his work.

Here and there a house sent up a thin smoke.
Women of the streets, sunk in stupid sleep,
Seemed all raw eyelid, and gasping lip.
-- And the poor's womenfolk, hugging the chilly droop
Of lank breasts, blew on their fingers, and their soup.
The extra pinch of cold, amid that of penury,
Added, for women in labour, its insult to injury.
Slitting the fogged air, the cry of a distant cock
Broke like a jet of blood through the spasm of a cough.
Buildings still swam in vague tides of mist;
And in silenced hospitals, with a last
Convulsive rattle, the dying gave up breath,
-- While night revellers staggered home, tired to death.

Morning, shivering in her robe of rose and green,
Made her hesitant way along the deserted Seine,
While Paris, rubbing tired eyes in its dark,
Woke like an ancient drudge to another day's work.

Le Crepuscule du matin

across the barracks came the bugle-blare:
the wind of dawn made all the street-lamps flare.

it was the hour dreams of evil swarm
and dark-eyed striplings writhe in pallets warm;
when, like a bleeding, palpitating eye,
the lamp's a red blot on the daylight sly:
when the soul struggles, crushed and overborne
by cumbering flesh, like lamplight with the morn.
the air is full of quivering things; each flees
like slackening tear-drops cancelled by the breeze,
and poets tire of verse and maids of love.

spirals of smoke arose, the roofs above.
daughters of joy, wide-mouthed, with livid eye,
lay drowned in stupid sleep, their lips awry;
gaunt women, dragging breasts which hunger knew,
breathed on their embers and their fingers blue.

it was the hour that loads, by cold and dearth,
the woes of mothers waiting to give birth;
when, like a blood-choked sobbing cry, afar,
a cock's crow tore the air crepuscular
and each tall hive lay drowned in misty seas,
while from the poorhouse wall of secrecies
rang the last broken gasps of dying men.
outside, rakes worn with toil rode home again.

Dawn, in her green and rosy garment shivering,
down the deserted Seine came loitering,
and dark-browed Paris -- toiler old and wise! --
caught up his shovel, rubbing both his eyes.

Morning Twilight

Reveille was blown in the courtyards of barracks,
And the morning wind fanned the lanterns.

It was the hour when those swarms of unwholesome dreams 
Twist on their pillows the brown adolescents; 
When, like a bloody eye, throbbing and roving, 
The lamp marks the day with a red freckle, 
When the soul, burdened by the irritable, heavy body, 
Copies the struggles of the lamp and the day. 
Like a weeping face, wiped by breezes, 
The air is filled with quivering of escaping things 
And man is tired of writing and woman of loving.

Here and there houses began to smoke. 
The ladies of delight, with livid eyelids, 
Mouths open, slept their futile sleep; 
Pauper women, dragging their thin, cold breasts, 
Blew on their brands and blew on their fingers. 
It was the hour when in cold and frugality 
The pangs of the laboring woman are quickened; 
Like a sob sliced by spumy blood 
The misty air was slashed by the song of the cock; 
A sea of fog bathed the buildings, 
And the agonized in the depths of asylums 
Uttered their last death-rattles in irregular hiccups. 
The debauchees returned, broken by their business.

Dawn, chattering with cold, in its pink and green robe, 
Advanced slowly over the deserted Seine, 
And gray Paris, rubbing its eyes, 
Reached for its tools, like an aged workman.

<i>The Kind-Hearted Servant of Whom You Were Jealous</i>

The kind-hearted servant of whom you were jealous, 
Who sleeps her sleep beneath a humble plot of grass, 
We must by all means take her some flowers. 
The dead, ah! the poor dead suffer great pains, 
And when October, the pruner of old trees, blows 
His melancholy breath about their marble tombs, 
Surely they must think the living most ungrateful, 
To sleep, as they do, between warm, white sheets, 
While, devoured by gloomy reveries, 
Without bedfellows, without pleasant causeries, 
Old, frozen skeletons, belabored by the worm, 
They feel the drip of winter's snow, 
The passing of the years; nor friends, nor family 
Replace the dead flowers that hang on their tombs.

If, some evening, when the fire-log whistles and sings 
I saw her sit down calmly in the great armchair, 
If, on a cold, blue night in December, 
I found her ensconced in a corner of my room, 
Grave, having come from her eternal bed 
Maternally to watch over her grown-up child, 
What could I reply to that pious soul, 
Seeing tears fall from her hollow eyelids?

<i>Now the Great-Hearted Servant, Who Aroused</i>

Now the great-hearted servant, who aroused 
Your jealousy, in humble earth is housed, 
Let's take, at least, some flowers for her relief. 
The dead, the piteous dead, know piercing grief, 
And when October blows, to prune old trees, 
And whistles round the marble where they freeze, 
How thankless then we living must appear 
Between warm sheets to sleep in comfort here, 
While, eaten by black dreams, they lie in woe 
Warm bedmates and their gossip to forego, 
Frostbitten skeletons, tunneled by vermin, 
To bear the moulting drip of Winter's ermine, 
For ages, with no friends nor kindred there 
The tatters on their railings to repair.

On evenings when the hearthlogs hiss and flare 
Were I to see her calmly take her chair: 
Or, in the calm and blue December gloom, 
Huddle within the corner of my room, 
Gravely returning from her bed eternal 
To tend this grown-up child with the maternal 
Care of old times -- how could I then reply 
To see the tears roll from each hollow eye?

The Servant

My old nurse and servant, whose great heart
made you jealous, is dead and sleeps apart
from us. Shouldn't we bring her a few flowers?
The dead, the poor dead, they have their bad hours,
and when October stripper of old trees,
poisons the turf and makes their marble freeze,
surely they find us worse than wolves or curs
for sleeping under mountainous warm furs...
These, eaten by the earth's black dream, lie dead,
without a wife or friend to warm their bed,
old skeletons sunk like shrubs in burlap bags --
and feel the ages trickle through their rags.
They have no heirs or relatives to chase
with children round their crosses and replace 
the potted refuse, where they lie beneath
their final flower, the interment wreath.

The oak log sings and sputters in my chamber
and in the cold blue half-light of December,
I see her tiptoe through my room, and halt
humbly, as if she'd hurried from her vault
with blankets for the child her sleepless eye
had coaxed and mothered to maturity.
What can I say to her to calm her fears?
My nurse's hollow sockets fill with tears.

The Old Servant

The servant that we had, you were so jealous of, 
I think we might at least lay flowers on her grave. 
Good creature, she's beneath the sod... and we're above; 
The dead, poor things, what valid grievances they have! 
And, when October comes, stripping the wood of leaves, 
And round their marble slabs the wind of autumn grieves, 
Surely, a living man must seem to the cold dead 
Somewhat unfeeling, sound asleep in his warm bed, 
While, gnawed by blacker dreams than any we have known -- 
Lovers, good conversation, every pleasure gone -- 
Old bones concerning which the worm has had his say, 
They feel the heavy snows of winter drip away, 
And years go by, and no one from the sagging vase 
Lifts the dried flowers to put fresh flowers in their place.

Some evening, when the whistling log begins to purr,
Supposing, in that chair, appeared the ghost of her;
Supposing, on some cold and blue December night,
I found her in my room, humble, half out of sight,
And thoughtful, having come from her eternal bed 
To shield her grown-up child, to soothe his troubled head, 
What could I find to say to the poor faithful soul, -- 
Seeing the tears beneath those sunken eyelids roll?

<i>I Have Not Forgotten Our White Cottage</i>

I have not forgotten our white cottage, 
Small but peaceful, near the city, 
Its plaster Pomona, its old Venus, 
Hiding their bare limbs in a stunted grove. 
In the evening streamed down the radiant sun, 
That great eye which stares from the inquisitive sky. 
From behind the window that scattered its bright rays 
It seemed to gaze upon our long, quiet dinners, 
Spreading wide its candle-like reflections 
On the frugal table-cloth and the serge curtains.

<i>Neighbouring on the City, I Recall </i>

Neighbouring on the city, I recall 
Our snow-white house, so full of peace and small: 
The casts of Venus and Pomona too 
Whose limbs a tiny thicket hid from view. 
The sun at eve, cascading fire and gold, 
Behind the glass, his sheaf of rays unrolled, 
Then, like an eye, inquisitively seemed 
To watch our long, hushed dinners as we dreamed;
Like candle-flames his glories, as they poured, 
Lit our serge curtains and our simple board.

A Memory

All this was long ago, but I do not forget 
Our small white house, between the city and the farms; 
The Venus, the Pomona, -- l remember yet 
How in the leaves they hid their chipping plaster charms; 
And the majestic sun at evening, setting late, 
Behind the pane that broke and scattered his bright rays, 
How like an open eye he seemed to contemplate 
Our long and silent dinners with a curious gaze: 
The while his golden beams, like tapers burning there, 
Made splendid the serge curtains and the simple fare.

Hatred's Cask

Hatred is the cask of the pale Danaides; 
Bewildered Vengeance with arms red and strong 
Vainly pours into its empty darkness 
Great pailfuls of the blood and the tears of the dead;

The Demon makes secret holes in this abyss, 
Whence would escape a thousand years of sweat and strain, 
Even if she could revive her victims, 
Could restore their bodies, to squeeze them dry once more.

Hatred is a drunkard in a tavern, 
Who feels his thirst grow greater with each drink 
And multiply itself like the Lernaean hydra.

-- While fortunate drinkers know they can be conquered, 
Hatred is condemned to this lamentable fate, 
That she can never fall asleep beneath the table.

The Cask of Hate

The Cask of the pale Danaids is Hate. 
Vainly Revenge, with red strong arms employed, 
Precipitates her buckets, in a spate 
Of blood and tears, to feed the empty void.

The Fiend bores secret holes to these abysms 
By which a thousand years of sweat and strain 
Escape, though she'd revive their organisms 
In order just to bleed them once again.

Hate is a drunkard in a tavern staying, 
Who feels his thirst born of its very cure, 
Like Lerna's hydra, multiplied by slaying.

Gay drinkers of their conqueror are sure, 
And Hate is doomed to a sad fate, unable 
Ever to fall and snore beneath the table.

The Ghost

Like angels with wild beast's eyes 
I shall return to your bedroom 
And silently glide toward you 
With the shadows of the night;

And, dark beauty, I shall give you 
Kisses cold as the moon 
And the caresses of a snake 
That crawls around a grave.

When the livid morning comes, 
You'll find my place empty, 
And it will be cold there till night.

I wish to hold sway over 
Your life and youth by fear, 
As others do by tenderness.

The Ghost

Like angels fierce and tawny-eyed, 
Back to your chamber I will glide, 
And noiselessly into your sight 
Steal with the shadows of the night.

And I will bring you, brown delight,
Kisses as cold as lunar night
And the caresses of a snake
Revolving in a grave. At break

Of morning in its livid hue, 
You'd find I had bequeathed to you 
An empty place as cold as stone.

Others by tenderness and ruth 
Would reign over your life and youth, 
But I would rule by fear alone.

The Revenant

Like angels with bright savage eyes 
I will come treading phantom-wise 
Hither where thou art wont to sleep, 
Amid the shadows hollow and deep.

And I will give thee, my dark one, 
Kisses as icy as the moon, 
Caresses as of snakes that crawl 
In circles round a cistern's wall.

When morning shows its livid face
There will be no-one in my place,
And a strange cold will settle here

Others, not knowing what thou art, 
May think to reign upon thy heart 
With tenderness; I trust to fear.

The Ghost

Like angels that have monster eyes, 
Over your bedside I shall rise, 
Gliding towards you silently 
Across night's black immensity.
O darksome beauty, you shall swoon 
At kisses colder than the moon 
And fondlings like a snake's who coils 
Sinuous round the grave he soils.

When livid morning breaks apace, 
You shall find but an empty place, 
Cold until night, and bleak, and drear: 
As others do by tenderness, 
So would I rule your youthfulness 
By harsh immensities of fear.

The Ghost

Just like an angel with evil eye, 
I shall return to thee silently, 
Upon thy bower I'll alight, 
With falling shadows of the night 

With thee, my brownie, I'll commune, 
And give thee kisses cold as the moon, 
And with a serpent's moist embrace, 
I'll crawl around thy resting-place. 

And when the livid morning falls, 
Thou'lt find alone the empty walls, 
And till the evening, cold 'twill be. 

As others with their tenderness, 
Upon thy life and youthfulness, 
I'll reign alone with dread o'er thee. 

Le Revenant

Like the mild-eyed angels sweet 
I will come to thy retreat, 
Stealing in without a sound 
When the shades of night close round. 

I will give thee manifold 
Kisses soft and moony-cold, 
Gliding, sliding o'er thee like 
A serpent crawling round a dike. 

When the livid morn creeps on 
You will wake and find me gone 
Till the evening come again. 

As by tenderness and ruth 
Others rule thy life and youth, 
I by terror choose to reign. 

The Ghost

Softly as brown-eyed Angels rove
I will return to thy alcove,
And glide upon the night to thee,
Treading the shadows silently.

And I will give to thee, my own,
Kisses as icy as the moon,
And the caresses of a snake
Cold gliding in the thorny brake.

And when returns the livid morn
Thou shalt find all my place forlorn
And chilly, till the falling night.

Others would rule by tenderness
Over thy life and youthfulness,
But I would conquer thee by fright!

The Joyful Corpse

In a rich, heavy soil, infested with snails, 
I wish to dig my own grave, wide and deep, 
Where I can at leisure stretch out my old bones 
And sleep in oblivion like a shark in the wave.

I have a hatred for testaments and for tombs; 
Rather than implore a tear of the world, 
I'd sooner, while alive, invite the crows 
To drain the blood from my filthy carcass.

O worms! black companions with neither eyes nor ears,
See a dead man, joyous and free, approaching you;
Wanton philosophers, children of putrescence,

Go through my ruin then, without remorse, 
And tell me if there still remains any torture 
For this old soulless body, dead among the dead!

The Joyous Dead

In a fat, greasy soil, that's full of snails, 
I'll dig a grave deep down, where I may sleep 
Spreading my bones at ease, to drowse in deep 
Oblivion, as a shark within the wave.

I hate all tombs, and testaments, and wills: 
I want no human tears; I'd like it more, 
That ravens could attack me with their bills, 
To broach my carcase of its living gore.

O worms! black friends, who cannot hear or see,
A free and joyous corpse behold in me!
You philosophic souls, corruption-bred,

Plough through my ruins! eat your merry way! 
And if there are yet further torments, say, 
For this old soulless corpse among the dead.

The Happy Dead Man

Slowly, luxuriously, I will hollow a deep grave, 
With my own hands, in rich black snail-frequented soil, 
And lay me down, forspent with that voluptuous toil, 
And go to sleep, as happy as a shark in the wave.

No funeral for me, no sepulcher, no hymns; 
Rather than beg for pity when alive, God knows, 
I have lain sick and shelterless, and let the crows 
Stab to their hearts' content at my lean festering limbs.

O worms! my small black comrades without ears or eyes,
Taste now for once a mortal who lies down in bliss.
O blithe materialists! O vermin of my last bed!

Come, march remorselessly through me. Come, and devise 
Some curious new torment, if you can, for this 
Old body without soul and deader than the dead.

Joyful Corpse

In a rich fertile loam where snails recess,
I wish to dig my own deep roomy grave,
There to stretch out my old bones, motionless,
Snug in death's sleep as sharks are in the wave.
Men's testaments and tombs spell queasiness,
The world's laments are not a boon I crave,
Sooner, while yet I live, let the crows press
My carrion blood from out my skull and nave.
O worms, black comrades without eyes or ears,
Behold, a dead man, glad and free, appears!
Lecher philosophers, spawn of decay,
Rummage remorseless through my crumbling head
To tell what torture may remain today
For this my soulless body which is dead.

The Gladly Dead

In a soil thick with snails and rich as grease
I've longed to dig myself a good deep grave,
There to stretch my old bones at ease
And sleep in oblivion, like a shark in a wave.

Wills I detest, and tombstones set in rows;
Before I'd beg a tear of anyone,
I'd rather go alive and let the crows
Bleed the last scrap of this old carrion.

O worms ! Black comrades without eye or ear,
Here comes a dead man for you, willing and gay;
Feasting philosophers, sons born of decay,

Come burrow through my ruins, shed not a tear;
But tell me if any torture is left to dread
For this old soulless body, dead as the dead?

The Joyous Defunct

Where snails abound -- in a juicy soil, 
I will dig for myself a fathomless grave, 
Where at leisure mine ancient bones I can coil, 
And sleep -- quite forgotten -- like a shark 'neath the wave. 

I hate every tomb -- I abominate wills, 
And rather than tears from the world to implore, 
I would ask of the crows with their vampire bills 
To devour every bit of my carcass impure. 

Oh worms, without eyes, without ears, black friends! 
To you a defunct-one, rejoicing, descends, 
Enlivened Philosophers -- offspring of Dung! 

Without any qualms, o'er my wreckage spread, 
And tell if some torment there still can be wrung 
For this soul-less old frame that is dead 'midst the dead! 

The Joyous Corse

In a soil full of snails and free from stones 
I fain would dig myself a pit full deep, 
Where I might lay at ease my aged bones 
And, like a wave-borne shark, forgetful sleep. 

For testaments I hate, and tombs I hate; 
Rather than crave a tear from human eyes 
I would invite the crows their hunger sate 
Upon my corpse's foul extremities. 

O worms! O black, deaf, sightless company! 
There comes to you a dead man glad and free. 
O philosophic sons of rottenness, 
Across my ruin crawl without remorse, 
And tell if any pain may yet oppress 
This old and soulless death-surrounded corse. 

Sepulcher

If on a dismal, sultry night
Some good Christian, through charity,
Will bury your vaunted body
Behind the ruins of a building

At the hour when the chaste stars 
Close their eyes, heavy with sleep, 
The spider will make his webs there, 
And the viper his progeny;

You will hear all year long
Above your damned head
The mournful cries of wolves

And of the half-starved witches, 
The frolics of lustful old men 
And the plots of vicious robbers.

The Burial of an Accursed Poet

If on a night obscure and deep, 
Some decent Christian, out of ruth, 
Buries behind some garbage-heap 
The vaunted body of your youth:

There, when the chaster stars have set 
And the moon her hammock slung 
Will the spider weave his net 
And the adder batch her young.

Your curse'd head beneath the ground
Will hear, through all the seasons then,
The dismal cries of wolves resound,

Old half-starved witches raising spooks, 
The antics of obscene old men, 
And black conspiracies of crooks.

Sepulchre

If on a dark and leaden night 
Some Christian soul, through charity, 
Bury your body, once so bright, 
By some ruined tenement's debris, 
At the dim hour when starlight ebbs 
And the stars doze against the dawn, 
There shall the spider weave his webs 
And there the viper breed his spawn.

There ceaselessly throughout the year 
Over your damned head you shall hear 
Dour wails of wolves and crazy rhymes 
Of starveling witches and grim snorts 
Of greybeard lechers at their sports 
And evil robbers hatching crimes.

The Burial of an Accursed Poet

If haply one dark, dreary night 
Some charitable soul appear 
And 'neath old rubble stow from sight 
The body that you held so dear -- 

What time the chaste stars veil their eyes, 
Drowsy and fain for slumber, there 
Spiders shall weave their traceries. 
Vipers their spotted young shall bear. 

Above your doomed head you will hear 
Each night throughout the heavy year 
The lean wolves' melancholy cries, 

Famished hags' bowlings for a crust, 
Lewd pastimes of old men who lust, 
And scoundrels' dark conspiracies. 

Sadness of the Moon

Tonight the moon dreams with more indolence, 
Like a lovely woman on a bed of cushions 
Who fondles with a light and listless hand 
The contour of her breasts before falling asleep;

On the satiny back of the billowing clouds,
Languishing, she lets herself fall into long swoons 
And casts her eyes over the white phantoms 
That rise in the azure like blossoming flowers.

When, in her lazy listlessness,
She sometimes sheds a furtive tear upon this globe,
A pious poet, enemy of sleep,

In the hollow of his hand catches this pale tear, 
With the iridescent reflections of opal, 
And hides it in his heart afar from the sun's eyes.

Sorrow of the Moon

More drowsy dreams the moon tonight. She rests 
Like a proud beauty on heaped cushions pressing, 
With light and absent-minded touch caressing, 
Before she sleeps, the contour of her breasts.

On satin-shimmering, downy avalanches 
She dies from swoon to swoon in languid change, 
And lets her eyes on snowy visions range 
That in the azure rise like flowering branches.

When sometimes to this earth her languor calm
Lets streak a stealthy tear, a pious poet,
The enemy of sleep, in his cupped palm,

Takes this pale tear, of liquid opal spun 
With rainbow lights, deep in his heart to stow it 
Far from the staring eyeballs of the Sun.

The Sadness of the Moon

Tonight the moon, by languorous memories obsessed, 
Lies pensive and awake: a sleepless beauty amid 
The tossed and multitudinous cushions of her bed, 
Caressing with an abstracted hand the curve of her breast.

Surrendered to her deep sadness as to a lover, for hours 
She lolls in the bright luxurious disarray of the sky -- 
Haggard, entranced -- and watches the small clouds float by 
Uncurling indolently in the blue air like flowers.

When now and then upon this planet she lets fall,
Out of her idleness and sorrow, a secret tear,
Some poet -- an enemy of slumber, musing apart -- 

Catches in his cupped hands the unearthly tribute, all 
Fiery and iridescent like an opal's sphere, 
And hides it from the sun for ever in his heart.

Tristesses de la lune

the moon tonight, more indolently dreaming,
as on a pillowed bed, a woman seems,
caressing with a hand distraught and gleaming,
her soft curved bosom, ere she sinks in dreams.

against a snowy satin avalanche
she lies entranced and drowned in swooning hours,
her gaze upon the visions born to blanch
those far blue depths with ever-blossoming flowers.

and when in some soft languorous interval,
earthward, she lets a stealthy tear-drop fall,
a poet, foe to slumber, toiling on,

with reverent hollow hand receives the pearl,
where shimmering opalescences unfurl,
and shields it in his heart, far from the sun.

Sadness of the Moon-Goddess

To-night the Moon dreams with increased weariness, 
Like a beauty stretched forth on a downy heap 
Of rugs, while her languorous fingers caress 
The contour of her breasts, before falling to sleep. 

On the satin back of the avalanche soft, 
She falls into lingering swoons, as she dies, 
While she lifteth her eyes to white visions aloft, 
Which like efflorescence float up to the skies. 

When at times, in her languor, down on to this sphere, 
She slyly lets trickle a furtive tear, 
A poet, desiring slumber to shun, 

Takes up this pale tear in the palm of his hand 
(The colours of which like an opal blend), 
And buries it far from the eyes of the sun. 

The Sadness of the Moon

This evening the Moon dreams more languidly, 
Like a beauty who on many cushions rests, 
And with her light hand fondles lingeringly, 
Before she sleeps, the slope of her sweet breasts. 

On her soft satined avalanches' height 
Dying, she laps herself for hours and hours 
In long, long swoons, and gazes at the white 
Visions which rise athwart the blue-like flowers. 

When sometimes in her perfect indolence 
She lets a furtive tear steal gently thence. 
Some pious poet, a lone, sleepless one, 

Takes in his hollowed hand this gem, shot through, 
Like an opal stone, with gleams of every hue, 
And in his heart's depths hides it from the sun. 

The Sadness of the Moon

The Moon more indolently dreams to-night
Than a fair woman on her couch at rest,
Caressing, with a hand distraught and light,
Before she sleeps, the contour of her breast.

Upon her silken avalanche of down,
Dying she breathes a long and swooning sigh;
And watches the white visions past her flown,
Which rise like blossoms to the azure sky.

And when, at times, wrapped in her languor deep,
Earthward she lets a furtive tear-drop flow,
Some pious poet, enemy of sleep,

Takes in his hollow hand the tear of snow
Whence gleams of iris and of opal start,
And hides it from the Sun, deep in his heart.

Music

Music often transports me like a sea!
Toward my pale star,
Under a ceiling of fog or a vast ether, 
I get under sail;

My chest thrust out and my lungs filled
Like the canvas,
I scale the slopes of wave on wave 
That the night obscures;

I feel vibrating within me all the passions 
Of ships in distress;
The good wind and the tempest with its convulsions

Over the vast gulf
Cradle me. At other times, dead calm, great mirror 
Of my despair!

Music

Music uplifts me like the sea and races
Me to my distant star,
Through veils of mist or through ethereal spaces,
I sail on it afar.

With chest flung out and lungs like sails inflated
Into the depth of night
I escalade the backs of waves serrated,
That darkness veils from sight.

I feel vibrating in me the emotions
That storm-tossed ships must feel.
The fair winds and the tempests and the oceans

Sway my exultant keel.
Sometimes a vast, dead calm with glassy stare
Mirrors my dumb despair.

Music

Music oft seizes me and sweeps me like a sea toward where my star shines pale,
With mists for ceiling, or through an immensity of ether I set sail.
My breast flung forward and my lungs swollen like white canvas, windswept I scale
The backs of heaping waves over which gentle night has wound a darkling veil.

So all the passions of a vessel suffering rise in me; the brave blast
Of winds, and storms in their convulsive movements, swing me, cradled on the vast
Abyss. At other times, dead calms, like mirrors there, reflecting my despair.

Music

Launch me, O music, whither on the soundless
Sea my star gleams pale!
I beneath cloudy cope or rapt in boundless
Aether set my sail;

With breast outblown, swollen by the wind that urges
Swelling sheets, I scale
The summit of the wave whose vexed surges
Night from me doth veil;

A labouring vessel's passions in my pulses
Thrill the shuddering sense;
The wind that wafts, the tempest that convulses,
O'er the gulf immense
Swing me. -- Anon flat calm and clearer air
Glass my soul's despair!

Music

Oft Music possesses me like the seas! 
To my planet pale, 
'Neath a ceiling of mist, in the lofty breeze, 
I set my sail. 

With inflated lungs and expanded chest, 
Like to a sail, 
On the backs of the heaped-up billows I rest --
Which the shadows veil --

I feel all the anguish within me arise 
Of a ship in distress;
The tempest, the rain, 'neath the lowering skies, 

My body caress: 
At times, the calm pool or the mirror clear 
Of my despair! 

Music

Oft Music, as it were some moving mighty sea, 
Bears me toward my pale 
Star: in clear space, or 'neath a vaporous canopy 
On-floating, I set sail. 

With heaving chest which strains forward, and lungs outblown, 
I climb the ridged steeps 
Of those high-piled clouds which 'thwart the night are thrown, 
Veiling its starry deeps. 

I suffer all the throes, within my quivering form. 
Of a great ship in pain, 
Now a soft wind, and now the writhings of a storm 

Upon the vasty main 
Rock me: at other times a death-like calm, the bare 
Mirror of my despair. 

The Pipe

I am the pipe of an author; 
One sees by my color, 
Abyssinian or Kaffir, 
That my master's a great smoker.

When he is laden with sorrow, 
I smoke like a cottage 
Where they are preparing dinner 
For the return of the ploughman.

I clasp and lull his soul 
In the wavy blue web 
That rises from my fiery mouth.

I give forth clouds of dittany 
That warm his heart and cure 
His mind of its fatigue.

The Author's Pipe

I am an author's pipe. To see me 
And my outlandish shape to heed, 
You'd know my master was a dreamy 
Inveterate smoker of the weed.

When be is loaded down with care, 
I like a stove will smoke and burn
Wherein the supper they prepare 
Against the labourer's return.

I nurse his spirit with my charm 
Swaying it in a soft, uncertain, 
And vaguely-moving azure curtain.

I roll a potent cloud of balm 
To lull his spirit into rest 
And cure the sorrows in his breast.

The Pipe

An author's favourite pipe am I, 
My Kaffir woman's countenance 
Tells the beholder at a glance 
My master smokes incessantly. 

If he is mournful or in pain 
I smoke as does the ploughman's cot 
When the good wife prepares the pot 
Before her spouse comes home again. 

I bind his soul and rock her well 
In the blue twisting skein which slips 
And rises from my fiery lips, 

And weave a very potent spell 
Which soothes his heart in its distress 
And heals his spirit's weariness. 

The Pipe

I am an author's pipe; 
From examining my Abyssinian 
Or Kaffir countenance, one sees 
That my master is a great smoker.

When he is laden with sorrow,
I smoke like a cottage
When the cooking is being prepared
Against the laborer's return

I entwine and I cradle his soul
In the drifting, blue film
That climbs from my fiery mouth,

And I turn a powerful balm 
Which charms his heart and heals 
His spirit of fatigues.

Destruction

The Demon is always moving about at my side; 
He floats about me like an impalpable air; 
I swallow him, I feel him burn my lungs 
And fill them with an eternal, sinful desire.

Sometimes, knowing my deep love for Art, he assumes 
The form of a most seductive woman, 
And, with pretexts specious and hypocritical, 
Accustoms my lips to infamous philtres.

He leads me thus, far from the sight of God, 
Panting and broken with fatigue, into the midst 
Of the plains of Ennui, endless and deserted,

And thrusts before my eyes full of bewilderment, 
Dirty filthy garments and open, gaping wounds, 
And all the bloody instruments of Destruction!

Destruction

Always the Demon fidgets here beside me 
And swims around, impalpable as air: 
I drink him, feel him burn the lungs inside me 
With endless evil longings and despair.

Sometimes, knowing my love of Art, he uses 
Seductive forms of women: and has thus, 
With specious, hypocritical excuses, 
Accustomed me to philtres infamous.

Leading me wayworn into wastes untrod
Of boundless Boredom, out of sight of God,
Using all baits to compass my abduction,

Into my eyes, confused and full of woe, 
Soiled clothes and bleeding gashes he will throw 
And all the grim regalia of Destruction.

A Martyr

Drawing by an unknown master

In the midst of perfume flasks, of sequined fabrics 
And voluptuous furniture,
Of marble statues, pictures, and perfumed dresses 
That trail in sumptuous folds,

In a warm room where, as in a hothouse, 
The air is dangerous, fatal,
Where bouquets dying in their glass coffins 
Exhale their final breath,

A headless cadaver pours out, like a river, 
On the saturated pillow
Red, living blood, that the linen drinks up 
As greedily as a meadow.

Like the pale visions engendered by shadows
And which hold our eyes riveted,
The head, its mane of hair piled up in a dark mass 
And wearing precious jewels,

On the bedside table, like a ranunculus,
Reposes; and, empty of thoughts,
A stare, blank and pallid as the dawn,
Escapes from the upturned eyeballs.

On the bed, the nude torso shamelessly displays
With the most complete abandon
The secret splendor and fatal beauty
That nature had bestowed on her;

A rose stocking embroidered with gold clocks remains
On her leg like a souvenir;
The garter, like a hidden flashing eye,
Darts its glance of diamond brilliance.

The bizarre aspect of that solitude
And of a large, languid portrait
With eyes as provocative as the pose,
Reveals an unwholesome love,

Guilty joys and exotic revelries,
With infernal kisses
That delighted the swarm of bad angels
Hovering in the curtains' folds;

And yet one sees from the graceful slimness
Of the angular shoulders.
The haunches slightly sharp, and the waist sinuous
As a snake poised to strike,

That she's still quite young! -- Had her exasperated soul 
And her senses gnawed by ennui
Thrown open their gates to the thirsty pack 
Of lost and wandering desires?

The vengeful man whom you could not with all your love 
Satisfy when you were alive,
Did he use your inert, complacent flesh to fill 
The immensity of his lust?

Reply, impure cadaver! and by your stiffened tresses 
Raising you with a fevered arm,
Tell me, ghastly head, did he glue on your cold teeth 
The kisses of the last farewell?

-- Far from the sneering world, far from the impure crowd, 
Far from curious magistrates,
Sleep in peace, sleep in peace, bizarre creature, 
In your mysterious tomb;

Your mate roams o'er the world, and your immortal form 
Watches over him when he sleeps;
Even as you, he will doubtless be faithful 
And constant until death.

The Martyr

(Drawing by an Unknown Master)

Amongst gilt fabrics, flasks of scent and wine,
Rich furniture, white marble, precious moulds.
Fine paintings, and rich, perfumed robes that shine
Swirled into sumptuous folds,

In a warm room, that like a hot-house stifles
With dangerous and fatal breath, where lie
Pale flowers in crystal tombs, exquisite trifles,
Exhaling their last sigh -- 

A headless corpse, cascading in a flood 
Hot, living blood, that soaks, with crimson stain 
A pillow slaked and sated with blood 
As any field with rain.

Like those pale visions which the gloom aborts
Which fix us in a still, hypnotic stare,
The bead, tricked out with gems of sorts,
In its huge mass of hair,

Like a ranunculous beside the bed, 
Rests on the table, empty of all thought. 
From eyes revulsed, like twilight, seems to spread 
A gaze that looks at naught.

Upon the bed the carcase, unabashed, 
Shows, in complete abandon, without shift, 
The secret splendour that, in life, it flashed 
Superbly, Nature's gift.

A rosy stocking, freaked with clocks of gold, 
Clings to one leg: a souvenir, it seems: 
The garter, from twin diamonds, with the cold 
Stare of a viper gleams.

The singular effect of solitude
And of a languorous portrait, with its eyes
Provocative as is its attitude,
Dark loves would advertise -- 

And guilty joys, with feasts of strange delight, 
Full of infernal kisses, omens certain 
To please the gloating angels of the Night 
Who swim behind each curtain.

And yet to see her nimble strength, the risky
Swerve of the rounded shoulder, and its rake,
The tented haunch, the figure lithe and frisky,
Flexed like an angry snake,

You'd know that she was young. 
Her soul affronted, Her senses stung with boredom -- were they bayed 
By packs of wandering, lost desires, and hunted, 
And finally betrayed?

The vengeful man, whose lust you could not sate, 
(In spite of much love) nor quench his fire -- 
Did he on your dead flesh then consummate 
His monstrous, last desire?

Answer me, corpse impure! With fevered fist, 
Grim visage, did he raise you up on high, 
And, as your silver frosty teeth he kissed, 
Bid you his last goodbye?

Far from inquiring magistrates that sneer, 
Far from this world of raillery and riot, 
Sleep peacefully, strange creature, on your bier, 
Of mystery and quiet.

Your lover roams the world. Your deathless shape
Watches his sleep and hears each indrawn breath. 
No more than you can he ever escape 
From constancy till death!

Still Life

From a Drawing by an Unknown master

Flasks of perfume, fabrics lame and spangled, rich
Furnishings of brocade and gold,
Statues of marble, paintings, scented dresses which
Trail, fold on sumptuous soft fold,

A warm room, sultry as a hothouse, where one fears
The air is poisonous with death,
Faded bouquets which, drooping in their crystal biers,
Exhale their ultimate faint breath.

A headless corpse pours forth a stream of vivid red
Blood on damp pillows, and the white
Linens absorb the bubbling flow into the bed
Avidly as a meadow might.

Pale as a specter born of a black dream's despair,
To strike our eyes and rivet them,
The head, with its dense curly mane of somber hair,
And its detail of gold and gem,
Rests on a small commode, like a ranunculus,
Comfortably; void of surmise,
A glint, leaden and blank as dawn, soars, vacuous,
From the stone orbs of upturned eyes.

The naked torso on the bed in graceful ease
Exhibits without scruple or shame
Her secret parts and all the fatal splendencies
Nature bestowed upon this frame.
On her leg, a pink stocking with gold clocks remains,
As it were, like a souvenir,
The jeweled garter, like a secret eye, retains 
A glance sharp as a diamond spear.

That curious air of solitude and, with it, those
Eyes gazing from a portrait near,
As languid and provoking as the sitter's pose, 
Reveal what gloomy loves reigned here.
Wraiths of strange feasts, of guilty joys, of recondite 
Demonic kisses passion moulds
To fill the swarm of evil angels with delight, 
Still hover in the curtain's folds.

She was still young! Did ennui gnaw her heart, exhaust 
Her senses, quench love's normal fires?
Did she grant welcome to the thirsty pack of lost 
Pleasures and devious desires?

That vengeful lover whom your wealth of love could still 
Not sate, you living and robust,
Did he use your inert complacent flesh to fill 
The extreme limits of his lust?
O corpse defiled, with fevered hand in his crazed drouth 
Did he grasp your stiff tresses? Tell,
Tell me, grim head, did he glue on your icy mouth 
The kisses of his last farewell?

Far from a jeering world and courts where without cease 
Magistrates probe as lawyers rave,
O most bizarre of beings, sleep ever at peace, at peace 
In your remote mysterious grave.
Whilst your mate roams the earth, your deathless form 
Keeps royal vigil over his sleeping breath,
And surely, like yourself, he shall continue loyal 
And constant to you unto death.

Murdered Woman

Drawing of an Unknown Master

Flasks of expensive scent, embroideries, rich brocades, 
Taffeta sofas, satin chairs;
Statues in marble, paintings; fragrance that pervades 
The empty, sumptuous gowns; warm airs

And sweet, -- yet sultry, damp, unhealthful to inhale:
That sickening green-house atmosphere
Dying bouquets in their glass coffins give -- a stale 
Voluptuous chamber... Lying here

A corpse without a head, whence flows in a bright stream, 
Making an ever broadening stain,
The red and living blood, which the white pillows seem 
To lap up like a thirsty plain.

Pale as those awful shapes that out of shadow stare,
Chaining our helpless eyes to theirs,
The head, with its great mass of rich and somber hair -- 
The earrings still in the small ears -- 

Like a ranunculus on the night-table sits;
And, void of thought, blank as the light
Of dawn, a glinting vague regard escapes from its
Eyeballs, up-rolled and china-white.

The headless trunk, in shameless posture on the bed,
Naked, in loose abandon lies,
Its secret parts exposed, its treasures all outspread
As if to charm a lover's eyes.

One sequined stocking, pink against the milky thigh,
Remains, pathetic souvenir;
The jeweled garter, like a flashing, secret eye,
Darts and withdraws a diamond leer.

A languorous portrait on the wall contrives to give
Force to the singular effect
Of the deep solitude, -- the eyes provocative,
The pose inviting, half-erect.

The ghost of something strange and guilty, of some feast
Involving most improper fare,
Demoniac kisses, all obscure desires released,
Swims in the silent curtains there.

And yet, that fragile shoulder, that fine hand and arm -- 
How delicate the curve they make! -- 
The pelvic bones so sweetly pointed, the whole form
Lithe as a teased and fighting snake! -- 

She must have been quite young... her senses, all her soul,
Avid for life and driven wild
By tedium, set ajar, it may be, to the whole
Pack of perversions... ah, poor child!

Did he at length, that man, his awful thirst too great
For living flesh to satisfy,
On this inert, obedient body consummate
His lust? -- O ravished corpse, reply!

Answer me, impure thing! Speak, frightening head, and tell:
Lifting you up by your long hair,
Did he on your cold teeth imprint in last farewell
One kiss, before he set you there?

Far from the mocking world, the peering crowd, oh far
From inquest, coroner, magistrate,
Sleep; sleep in peace; I leave you lying as you are,
Mysterious unfortunate.

In vain your lover roves the world; the thought of you
Troubles each chamber where he lies:
Even as you are true to him, he will be true
To you, no doubt, until he dies.

A Martyred Woman

Sketch by an Unknown Master

In the middle of scent-bottles, braided material
And voluptuous furniture,
Amongst marbles, pictures, perfumed dresses 
Trailing in expensive folds,

In a warm room, where like a hothouse
The air is dangerous, fatal,
Where dying flowers sigh out their last 
In their glass coffins,

A headless corpse discharges, like a river, 
Upon the slaked pillow,
Its red and living blood, which the linen laps up
With the greed of a meadow.

Like those ghastly visions engendered by shadows, 
And riveting our eyes
The head, with the weight of its dark mane 
And its precious jewels

Rests like a plant on the bedside table; 
And, empty of thoughts,
A look, loose and white as twilight 
Escapes its misplaced eyes.

On the bed the naked, shameless trunk spreads out 
In utter unconstraint
Its secret splendor and its fatal beauty, 
The gift of nature;

A pink stocking, embroidered with gold sequins, remains
On the leg like a memory;
The garter, like a flaming, hidden eye, 
Darts a diamonded glance.

The strange look of this solitude
And of a great languorous tableau,
To eyes provocative as her posture
Reveals a dark love,

A guilty joy and strange feasts,
Full of the kisses of hell
That please the swarms of evil angels
Swimming in the folds of curtains;

And yet, seeing that elegant emaciation
Of shoulder with the blatant contour
The hip a little angular and the taut waistline
Like a furious reptile,

She is still quite young! -- Did her inflamed soul
And her senses gnawn by boredom
Yawn for that thirsty pack of
Wandering, lost passions?

Did that vengeful man whom, living, you could not gratify,
In spite of so much love
Heap upon your indolent, accommodating flesh
The size of his desire?

Answer, O violated corpse! and raising yourself with feverish arm
By your stiff braids,
Tell me, terrifying head, did he press upon your cold teeth
His final farewells?

 -- Far from the bantering world, from the corrupted mob,
Far from inquisitive magistrates,
Sleep peacefully, sleep peacefully, strange creature,
In your mysterious tomb;

Your husband roves the world and your deathless figure
Watches by him when he sleeps;
Doubtless he will be faithful as you are,
And constant to death.

Lesbos

Mother of Latin games and Greek delights,
Lesbos, where kisses, languishing or joyous,
Burning as the sun's light, cool as melons,
Adorn the nights and the glorious days;
Mother of Latin games and Greek delights,

Lesbos, where the kisses are like cascades 
That throw themselves boldly into bottomless chasms 
And flow, sobbing and gurgling intermittently, 
Stormy and secret, teeming and profound; 
Lesbos, where the kisses are like cascades!

Lesbos, where courtesans feel drawn toward each other,
Where for every sigh there is an answering sigh,
The stars admire you as much as Paphos,
And Venus may rightly be jealous of Sappho!
Lesbos, where courtesans feel drawn toward each other,

Lesbos, land of hot and languorous nights,
That make the hollow-eyed girls, amorous
Of their own bodies, caress before their mirrors
The ripe fruits of their nubility, O sterile pleasure!
Lesbos, land of hot and languorous nights,

Let old Plato look on you with an austere eye; 
You earn pardon by the excess of your kisses 
And the inexhaustible refinements of your love, 
Queen of the sweet empire, pleasant and noble land. 
Let old Plato look on you with an austere eye.

You earn pardon by the eternal martyrdom 
Inflicted ceaselessly upon aspiring hearts 
Who are lured far from us by radiant smiles 
Vaguely glimpsed at the edge of other skies!
You earn pardon by that eternal martyrdom!

Which of the gods will dare to be your judge, Lesbos, 
And condemn your brow, grown pallid from your labors, 
If his golden scales have not weighed the flood 
Of tears your streams have poured into the sea? 
Which of the gods will dare to be your judge, Lesbos?

What are to us the laws of the just and unjust 
Virgins with sublime hearts, honor of these islands; 
Your religion, like any other, is august, 
And love will laugh at Heaven and at Hell! 
What are to us the laws of the just and unjust?

For Lesbos chose me among all other poets 
To sing the secret of her virgins in their bloom, 
And from childhood I witnessed the dark mystery 
Of unbridled laughter mingled with tears of gloom; 
For Lesbos chose me among all other poets.

And since then I watch from Leucadia's summit,
Like a sentry with sure and piercing eyes
Who looks night and day for tartane, brig or frigate,
Whose forms in the distance flutter against the blue;
And since then I watch from Leucadia's summit,

To find out if the sea is indulgent and kind, 
If to the sobs with which the rocks resound 
It will bring back some night to Lesbos, who forgives, 
The worshipped body of Sappho, who departed 
To find out if the sea is indulgent and kind!

Of the virile Sappho, paramour and poet, 
With her wan pallor, more beautiful than Venus!
-- The blue eyes were conquered by the black eyes, ringed 
With dark circles, traced by the sufferings 
Of the virile Sappho, paramour and poet!

-- Lovelier than Venus dominating the world,
Pouring out the treasures of her serenity
And the radiance of her golden-haired youth
Upon old Ocean, delighted with his daughter;
Lovelier than Venus dominating the world!

-- Of Sappho who died the day of her blasphemy, 
When, insulting the rite and the established cult, 
She made of her body the supreme pabulum 
Of a cruel brute whose pride punished the sacrilege 
Of her who died on the day of her blasphemy.

And it is since that time that Lesbos mourns, 
And in spite of the homage the world renders her, 
Gets drunk every night with the tempest's howls 
Which are hurled at the skies by her deserted shores. 
And it is since that time that Lesbos mourns.

Lesbos

Mother of Grecian joys and Latin games,
Lesbos, where kisses, languishing or gay,
As melons cool, or warm as solar flames,
Adorn alike the glorious night and day:
Mother of Grecian joys and Latin games,

Lesbos of kisses reckless as cascades 
That hurl themselves to bottomless abysses, 
Stormy and secret, myriad-swarming kisses, 
That cluck and sob and gurgle in the shades. 
Lesbos of kisses reckless as cascades!

Lesbos where Phrynes each to each are plighted,
Where never yet unanswered went a sigh,
Where Paphos with a rival is requited,
And Venus with a Sappho has to vie!
Lesbos where Phrynes each to each are plighted,

Lesbos, the land of warm and languid night,
Where gazing in their mirrors as they dress
The cave-eyed girls, in barren, vain delight,
The fruits of their nubility caress.
Lesbos, the land of warm and languid night,

Let Plato frown austerely all the while. 
Your pardon's from excess of kisses won, 
Queen of sweet empire, rare and noble isle -- 
And from refinements which are never done.
 Let Plato frown austerely all the while.

From martyrdom your pardon you beguile,
Inflicted without stint on hearts that soar 
Far, far away, drawn by some radiant smile 
Seen vaguely on a strange celestial shore. 
From martyrdom your pardon you beguile.

Lesbos, what God to judge you would make bold, 
Or damn your brows so pale and sadly grave, 
Not having weighed upon the scales of gold 
The floods of tears you've poured into the wave. 
Lesbos which God to judge you would make bold?

For us, what mean the statutes of the just? 
Pride of the isles, whose hearts sublimely swell, 
Your faith as any other is august 
And Love can laugh alike at Heaven and Hell. 
For us, what mean the statues of the just?

For Lesbos chose me of all men on earth 
To sing the secrets of her virgin flowers, 
Taught as a child the sacred rites of mirth 
And mysteries of sorrow which are ours. 
So Lesbos chose me of all men on earth.

Since then I watch on the Leucadian height. 
Like a lone sentry with a piercing view 
Who sees the vessels ere they heave in sight 
With forms that faintly tremble in the blue. 
Since then I watch on the Leucadian height

To find out if the sea's heart still is hardened 
And from the sobs that drench the rock with spray 
If it will bring back Sappho, who has pardoned, 
The corpse of the adored, who went away 
To find out that the sea its heart has hardened;

Of the male Sappho, lover, queen of singers,
More beautiful than Venus by her woes.
The blue eye cannot match the black, where lingers
The shady circle that her grief bestows
On the male Sappho, lover, queen of singers -- 

Fairer than Venus towering on the world
And pouring down serenity like water
In the blond radiance of her tresses curled
To daze the very Ocean with her daughter,
Fairer than Venus towering on the world -- 

Of Sappho, whom her blasphemy requited 
The day she quit the rite and scorned the cult, 
And gave her lovely body to be slighted 
By a rough brute, whose scorn was the result 
For Sappho, whom the blasphemy requited.

And since that time has Lesbos lived lamenting 
In spite of all the honours of mankind, 
And lives upon the storm-howl unrelenting 
Of its bleak shores, the sport of wave and wind: 
For since that time has Lesbos lived lamenting.

Lesbos

Mother of Latin revelry and of Greek delight,
Lesbos, whereof the kisses, disconsolate or gay,
Hot as the sun, or cool as melons plucked by night,
Beguile the unshadowed and the shadowed hours away;
Mother of Latin revelry and of Greek delight,

Lesbos, whereof the kisses are whirlpools and cascades
Journeying carelessly into a dark abyss:
So wild the sobbing and laughter among thy colonnades,
So secret, so profound, so stormy, every kiss!
Lesbos, whereof the kisses are whirlpools and cascades!

Lesbos, where the sweet slaves one to another yearn,
Where there is never a glance without an echoing sign;
Even as upon Cyprus the stars upon thee burn
With praise, and Cyprus' queen is envious of thine,
Lesbos, where the sweet slaves one to mother yearn -- 

Lesbos, of sultry twilights and pure, infertile joy,
Where deep-eyed maidens, thoughtlessly disrobing, see
Their beauty, and are entranced before their mirrors, and toy
Fondly with the soft fruits of their nubility;
Lesbos, of sultry twilights and pure, infertile joy!

Let frown the old lined forehead of Plato as it will: 
Thy pardon is assured -- even by the strange excess, 
Luxurious isle, of thy long sterile rapture, still 
Contriving some new freak or form of tenderness; 
Let frown the old lined forehead of Plato as it will.

Thy pardon has been bought with our eternal pain, 
The lonely martyrdom endured in every age 
By those who sigh for pleasures outlandish and insane 
To ease the unearthly longing no pleasure can assuage. 
Thy pardon has been bought with our eternal pain.

Who, Lesbos, of the gods would dare pronounce thy fate 
And brand thy passionate white brow with infamy -- 
Or hope by any art or science to estimate 
The tears, the tears thy streams have poured into the sea? 
Who, Lesbos, of the gods would dare pronounce thy fate?

What are men's laws to us, injurious or benign? 
Proud virgins, glory of the Aegean! We know well 
Love, be it most foredoomed, most desperate, is divine, 
And love will always laugh at heaven and at hell! 
What are men's laws to us, injurious or benign?

Lo! I was named by Lesbos of all the lists of earth 
To celebrate her sad-eyed girls and their sweet lore: 
And I have known from childhood the noise of loud, crazed mirth 
Confused mysteriously with terrible weeping -- for 
Lo! I was named by Lesbos of all the lists of earth.

And I have watched thenceforward from the Leucadian cliff,
Like an unwearying old sentry, who can descry
Far out on the horizon a sailboat or a skiff
Invisible to others, with his sharp, practised eye;
And I have watched thenceforward from the Leucadian cliff

To find if the cold wave were pitiful and good -- 
And someday I shall see come wandering home, I know, 
To all-forgiving Lesbos upon the twilight flood 
The sacred ruins of Sappho, who set forth long ago 
To find if the cold wave were pitiful and good;

Of Sappho, poet and lover -- the virile, calm, and brave, 
More beautiful than Venus, by force of earthly grief -- 
More beautiful than blue-eyed Venus, with her grave 
And dusky glance disclosing the sorrows past belief 
Of Sappho, poet and lover -- the virile, calm, and brave:

More beautiful than Venus arising to the world
And scattering all round her the iridescent fire
Of her blond loveliness with rainbow hues impearled
Upon the old green ocean, her bedazzled sire;
More beautiful than Venus arising to the world!

-- Of Sappho, who died proudly the day of her soul's crime
When, faithless to her teaching and to her serious pledge,
She flung the occult dark roses of her love sublime
To a vain churl. Alas! How deep the sacrilege
Of Sappho, who died proudly the day of her soul's crime!

And from that day to this the isle of Lesbos mourns --  
And heedful of the world's late homage in no wise, 
Gives answer but with the hollow moaning of her wild bourns: 
The sea's long obloquy to the unlistening skies! 
And from that day to this the isle of Lesbos mourns.

Lesbos

Mother of Latin sports and Greek delights,
Where kisses languishing or pleasureful,
Warm as the suns, as the water-melons cool,
Adorn the glorious days and sleepless nights,
Mother of Latin sports and Greek delights,

Lesbos, where kisses are as waterfalls
That fearless into gulfs unfathom'd leap,
Now run with sobs, now slip with gentle brawls,
Stormy and secret, manifold and deep;
Lesbos, where kisses are as waterfalls!

Lesbos, where Phryne Phryne to her draws,
Where ne'er a sigh did echoless expire,
As Paphos' equal thee the stars admire,
Nor venus envies Sappho without cause!
Lesbos, where Phryne Phryne to her draws,

Lesbos, the land of warm and languorous nights,
Where by their mirrors seeking sterile good,
The girls with hollow eyes, in soft delights,
Caress the ripe fruits of their womanhood,
Lesbos, the land of warm and languorous nights.

Leave, leave old Plato's austere eye to frown;
Pardon is thine for kisses' sweet excess,
Queen of the land of amiable renown,
And for exhaustless subtleties of bliss,
Leave, leave old Plato's austere eye to frown.

Pardon is thine for the eternal pain
That on the ambitious hearts for ever lies,
Whom far from us the radiant smile could gain,
Seen dimly on the verge of other skies;
Pardon is thine for the eternal pain!

Which of the gods will dare thy judge to be,
And to condemn thy brown with labour pale,
Not having balanced in his golden scale
The flood of tears thy brooks pour'd in the sea?
Which of the gods will dare thy judge to be?

What boot the laws of just and of unjust?
Great-hearted virgins, honour of the isles,
Lo, your religion is also august,
And love at hell and heaven together smiles!
What boot the laws of just and of unjust?

For Lesbos chose me out from all my peers,
To sing the secret of her maids in flower,
Opening the mystery dark from childhood's hour,
Of frantic laughters, mix'd with sombre tears;
For Lesbos chose me out from all my peers.

And since I from Leucate's top survey,
Like a sentinel with piercing eye and true,
Watching for brig and frigate night and day,
Whose distant outlines quiver in the bue,
And since I from Leucate's top survey,

To learn if kind and merciful the sea,
And midst the sobs that make the rock resound,
Brings back some eve to pardoning Lesbos, free
The worshipp'd corpse of Sappho, who made her bound
To learn if kind and merciful the sea!

Of her the man-like lover-poetess,
In her sad pallor more than Venus fair!
The azure eye yields to that black eye, where
The cloudy circle tells of the distress
Of her the man-like lover-poetess!

Fairer than Venus risen on the world,
Pouring the treasures of her aspect mild,
The radiance of her fair white youth unfurl'd
On Ocean old enchanted with his child;
Fairer than Venus risen on the world.

Of Sappho, who, blaspheming, died that day
When trampling on the rite and sacred creed,
She made her body fair the supreme prey
Of one whose pride punish'd the impious deed
Of Sappho, who, blaspheming, died that day.

And since that time it is that Lesbos moans,
And, spite the homage which the whole world pays,
Is drunk each night with cries of pain and groans,
Her desert shores unto the heavens do raise,
And since that time it is that Lesbos moans!

Damned Women

Delphine and Hippolyta

In the pallid light of languishing lamps, 
In deep cushions redolent of perfume, 
Hippolyta dreamed of the potent caresses 
That drew aside the veil of her young innocence.

She was seeking, with an eye disturbed by the storm, 
The already distant skies of her naivete, 
Like a voyager who turns to look back 
Toward the blue horizons passed early in the day.

The listless tears from her lacklustrous eyes, 
The beaten, bewildered look, the dulled delight, 
Her defeated arms thrown wide like futile weapons, 
All served, all adorned her fragile beauty.

Lying at her feet, calm and filled with joy, 
Delphine gazed at her hungrily, with burning eyes, 
Like a strong animal watching a prey 
Which it has already marked with its teeth.

The strong beauty kneeling before the frail beauty, 
Superb, she savored voluptuously 
The wine of her triumph and stretched out toward the girl 
As if to reap her reward of sweet thankfulness.

She was seeking in the eyes of her pale victim 
The silent canticle that pleasure sings 
And that gratitude, sublime and infinite, 
Which the eyes give forth like a long drawn sigh.

"Hippolyta, sweet, what do you think of our love? 
Do you understand now that you need not offer 
The sacred burnt-offering of your first roses 
To a violent breath which could make them wither?

My kisses are as light as the touch of May flies 
That caress in the evening the great limpid lakes, 
But those of your lover will dig furrows 
As a wagon does, or a tearing ploughshare;

They will pass over you like heavy teams
Of horses or oxen, with cruel iron-shod hooves...
Hippolyta, sister! please turn your face to me,
You, my heart and soul, my all, half of my own self,

Turn toward me your eyes brimming with azure and stars! 
For one of those bewitching looks, O divine balm, 
I will lift the veil of the more subtle pleasures 
And lull you to sleep in an endless dream!"

Hippolyta then raised her youthful head: 
"I am not ungrateful and I do not repent, 
Delphine darling; I feel restless and ill, 
As I do after a rich midnight feast.

I feel heavy terrors pouncing on me 
And black battalions of scattered phantoms 
Who wish to lead me onto shifting roads 
That a bloody horizon shuts in on all sides.

Is there something strange in what we have done? 
Explain if you can my confusion and my fright: 
I shudder with fear when you say: 'My angel!' 
And yet I feel my mouth moving toward you.

Do not look at me that way, you, my dearest thought: 
The sister of my choice whom I'd love forever 
Even if you were an ambush prepared for me 
And the beginning of my perdition."

Delphine, shaking her tragic mane and stamping her foot 
As if she were stamping on the iron Tripod, 
Her eyes fatal, replied in a despotic voice: 
"Who dares to speak of hell in the presence of love?

May he be cursed forever, that idle dreamer,
The first one who in his stupidity
Entranced by a sterile, insoluble problem,
Wished to mix honesty with what belongs to love!

He who would unite in a mystic harmony
Coolness with warmth and the night with the day
Will never warm his palsied flesh
With that red sun whose name is love!

Go if you wish and find a stupid sweetheart, run
To offer your virgin heart to his cruel kisses;
Full of remorse and horror, and livid,
You will bring back to me your stigmatized breasts...

Woman here below can serve only one master!" 
But the girl pouring out the vast grief in her heart, 
Suddenly cried: "I feel opening within me 
A yawning abyss; that abyss is my heart!

Burning like a volcano and deep as the void! 
Nothing will satiate that wailing monster 
Nor cool the thirst of the Eumenides 
Who with torch in hand burn his very blood.

Let our drawn curtains separate us from the world
And let lassitude bring to us repose!
I want to bury my head in your deep bosom
And find in your breast the cool of the tomb!"

-- Go down, go down, lamentable victims,
Go down the pathway to eternal hell!
Plunge to the bottom of the abyss where all crime
Whipped by a wind that comes not from heaven,

Boil pell-mell with the sound of a tempest. 
Mad shades, run to the goal of your desires; 
You will never be able to sate your passion 
And your punishment will be born of your pleasures.

Never will a cool ray light your caverns; 
Through the chinks in the walls feverish miasmas 
Filter through, burst into flame like lanterns 
And permeate your bodies with frightful odors.

The bleak sterility of your pleasures 
Increases your thirst and makes your skin taut 
And the raging wind of carnal desire 
Makes your flesh snap like an old flag.

Damned, wandering, far from living people,
Roam like the wolves across the desert waste;
Fulfill your destinies, dissolute souls,
And flee the infinite you carry in your hearts!

Damned Women

Delphine and Hippolyta

Over deep cushions, drenched with drowsy scents 
Where fading lamplight shed its dying glow, 
Hippolyta recalls and half-repents 
The kisses that first thawed her youthful snow.

She sought, with tempest-troubled gaze, the skies 
Of her first innocence, now far away, 
As travellers who backward turn their eyes 
To blue horizons passed at break of day.

Within her haggard eyes the tears were bright. 
Her broken look, her dazed, voluptuous air, 
Her vanquished arms like weapons shed in Right, 
Enhanced her fragile beauty with despair.

Stretched at her feet Delphine contented lay 
And watched with burning eyeballs from beneath 
Like a fierce tigress who, to guard her prey, 
Has set a mark upon it with her teeth.

Strong beauty there to fragile beauty kneeling, 
Superb, she seemed to sniff the heady wine 
Of triumph: and stretched out to her, appealing 
For the reward of raptures half-divine.

She sought within her victim's pallid eye 
Dumb hymns that pleasure sings without a choir, 
And gratitude that, like a long-drawn sigh, 
Swells from the eyelid, swooning with fire.

"Hippolyta, dear heart, have you no trust? 
Do you not know the folly that exposes 
To the fierce pillage of the brawling gust 
The sacred holocaust of early roses?

My kisses are as light as fairy midges 
That on calm evenings skim the crystal lake. 
Those of your man would plough such ruts and ridge 
As lumbering carts or tearing coulters make.

They'll tramp across you, like a ruthless team 
Of buffaloes or horses, yoked in lust. 
Dear sister, turn your face to me, my dream, 
My soul, my all, my twin, to whom I trust!

Turn me your eyes of deepest, starry blue. 
For one of those deep glances that you send, 
I'd lift the veil of darkest joys for you 
And rock you in a dream that has no end."

But then Hippolyta raised up her head, 
"No blame nor base ingratitude I feel, 
But, as it were, a kind of nauseous dread 
After some terrible, nocturnal meal.

I feel a swooping terror that explodes 
In legions of black ghosts towards me speeding 
Who crowd me on to swiftly moving roads, 
That, sliced by sheer horizons, end up bleeding.

Have we done something monstrous that I tremble?
Explain, then, if you can; for when you say,
'Angel', I cower. Yet I cannot dissemble
That, when you speak, my lips are drawn your way.

Oh, do not fix me with a stare so steady 
You whom I love till death in still submission, 
Yes, even though you, like an ambush ready, 
Are the beginning of my own perdition."

Then Delphine stamped and shook her tragic mane, 
And, like a priestess, foaming and fierce, and fell, 
Spoke in a lordly and prophetic strain
-- "Who dares, in front of Love, to mention Hell?

Curbed forever be that useless dreamer 
Who first imagined, in his brutish mind, 
Of sheer futility the fatuous schemer, 
Honour with Love could ever be combined.

He who in mystic union would enmesh 
Shadow with warmth, and daytime with the night, 
Will never warm his paralytic flesh 
At the red sun of amorous delight.

Go, if you wish, and seek some boorish lover:
Offer your virgin heart to his crude hold,
Full of remorse and horror you'll recover,
And bring me your scarred breast to be consoled...

Down here, a soul can only serve one master." 
But the girl, venting her tremendous woe, 
Cried out "I feel a huge pit of disaster 
Yawning within: it is my heart, I know!

Like a volcano burning, deep as death, 
There's naught that groaning monster can assuage 
Nor quench of thirst the Fury's burning breath 
Who brands it with a torch to make it rage.

Let our closed curtains isolate the rest, 
Until exhaustion bring us sleep, while I 
Annihilate myself upon your breast 
And find in you a tomb on which to die."

Go down, go down, poor victims, it is time; 
The road to endless hell awaits your lusts. 
Plunge to the bottom of the gulf, where crime 
Is flagellated by infernal gusts.

Swirling pell-mell, and with a tempest's roar, 
Mad shades, pursue your craving without measure: 
Your rages will be sated nevermore, 
Your torture is begotten of your pleasure.

No sunbeam through your dungeon will come leaking: 
Only miasmic fevers, through each chink, 
Will filter, like sick lanterns, redly streaking, 
And penetrate your bodies with their stink.

The harsh sterility of all you relish 
Will swell your thirst, and turn you both to hags. 
The wind of your desire, with fury hellish 
Will flog your flapping carrion like wet flags.

Far from live folk, like werewolves howling high, 
Gallop the boundless deserts you unroll. 
Fulfill your doom, disordered minds, and fly 
The infinite you carry in your soul.

Delphine and Hippolyte

The lamps had languisht and their light was pale;
On cushions deep Hippolyta reclined.
Those potent kisses that had torn the veil
From her young candour filled her dreaming mind.

With tempest-troubled eyes she sought the blue
Heaven of her innocence, how far away!
Like some sad traveller, who turns to view
The dim horizons passed at dawn of day.

Tears and the muffled light of weary eyes,
The stupor and the dull voluptuous trance,
Limp arms, like weapons dropped by one who flies --
All served her fragile beauty to enhance.

Calm at her feet and joyful, Delphine lay
And gazed at her with ardent eyes and bright,
Like some strong beast that, having mauled its prey, 
Draws back to mark the imprint of its bite.

Strong and yet bowed, superbly on her knees,
She snuffed her triumph, on that frailer grace
Poring voluptuously, as though to seize
The signs of thanks upon the other's face.

Gazing, she sought in her pale victim's eye
The speechless canticle that pleasure sings,
The infinite gratitude that, like a sigh, 
Mounts slowly from the spirit's deepest springs.

"Now, now you understand (for love like ours
Is proof enough) that 'twere a sin to throw
The sacred holocaust of your first flowers
To those whose breath might parch them as they blow.

Light falls my kiss, as the ephemeral wing
That scarcely stirs the shining of a lake.
What ruinous pain your lover's kiss would bring!
A plough that leaves a furrow in its wake.

Over you, like a herd of ponderous kine,
Man's love will pass and his caresses fall,
Like trampling hooves. Then turn your face to mine;
Turn, oh my heart, my half of me, my all!

Turn, turn, that I may see their starry lights,
Your eyes of azure; turn. For one dear glance
I will reveal your love's most obscure delights,
And you shall drowse in pleasure's endless trance."

"Not thankless, nor repentant in the least
Is your Hippolyta." She raised her head.
"But one whom from some grim nocturnal feast
Returns at dawn feels less disquieted.

I bear a weight of terrors, and dark hosts
Of phantoms haunt my steps and seem to lead.
I walk, compelled, behind these beckoning ghosts
Down sliding roads and under skies that bleed.

Is ours so strange an act, so full of shame?
Explain the terrors that disturb my bliss.
When you say, Love, I tremble at the name;
And yet my mouth is thirsty for your kiss.

Ah, look not so, dear sister, look not so!
You whom I love, even though that love should be
A snare for my undoing, even though
Loving I am lost for all eternity."

Delphine looked up, and fate was in her eye.
From the god's tripod and beneath his spell,
Shaking her tragic locks, she made reply:
"Who in love's presence dares to speak of hell?

Thinker of useless thoughts, let him be cursed
Who in his folly, venturing to vex
A question answerless and barren, first
With wrong and right involved the things of sex!

He who in mystical accord conjoins
Shadow with heat, dusk with the noon's high fire,
Shall never warm the palsy of his loins
At that red sun which mortals desire.

Go, seek some lubber groom's deflowering lust;
Take him your heart and leave me here despised!
Go -- and bring back, all horror and disgust,
The livid breasts man's love has stigmatized.

One may not serve two masters here below."
But the child answered: "I am torn apart,
I feel my inmost being rent, as though
A gulf had yawned -- the gulf that is my heart.

Naught may this monster's desperate thirst assuage, --
As fire 'tis hot, as space itself profound --
Naught stay the Fury from her quenchless rage,
Who with her torch explores its bleeding wound.

Curtain the world away and let us try
If lassitude will bring the boon of rest.
In your deep bosom I would sink and die,
Would find the grave's fresh coolness on your breast."

Hence, lamentable victims, get you hence!
Hells yawn beneath, your road is straight and steep.
Where all the crimes receive their recompense
Wind-whipped and seething in the lowest deep

With a huge roaring as of storms and fires,
Go down, mad phantoms, doomed to seek in vain
The ne-er-won goal of unassuaged desires,
And in your pleasures find eternal pain!

Sunless your caverns are; the fever damps
That filter in through every crannied vent
Break out with marsh-fire into sudden lamps
And steep your bodies with their frightful scent.

The barrenness of pleasures harsh and stale
Makes mad your thirst and parches up your skin;
And like an old flag volleying in the gale,
Your whole flesh shudders in the blasts of sin.

Far from your kind, outlawed and reprobate,
Go, prowl like wolves through desert worlds apart!
Disordered souls, fashion your own dark fate,
And flee the god you carry in your heart.

Lovers of the Damned

Under pale flickering lamps, deep in recesses 
Of lissome cushions of suave redolence, 
Hippolyta mused of the fierce caresses 
That raised the veils of her young innocence.

Her gaze still ravaged by the storm, she eyed 
The distant sides of her once candid mind 
As a spent voyager who turns aside 
To view blue vistas he has left behind.

The lazy tears in her lackluster glances, 
Her beaten stuporous air, her weariness, 
Her aching arms drooping like futile lances, 
All served to foster her frail loveliness.

Rapt with calm joy, Delphine, her lover, lay 
Prone at her feet; eyes blazing with delight, 
She was a strong beast gazing at the prey 
On which her teeth had marked their savage bite.

Strong beauty knelt before frail beauty there -- 
Superb, she savored with voluptuous mood 
The wine of triumph, and, as though in prayer, 
Her hands solicited sweet gratitude.

She scanned her dupe's pale glance to find in it 
The muted hymn lust raises to the skies, 
And thankfulness, sublime and infinite, 
Which glances utter soft as long-drawn sighs.

-- "Hippolyta, what of this strange sweet thing? 
You need not sully your first roses now 
To brutal man as a burnt-offering 
His violent breath would wither on the bough.

My kiss moves lightly as a May fly moves, 
Caressing the great limpid lakes at eve, 
But a man's kisses will dig furrowed grooves 
Such as huge carts or tearing plowshares leave.

They will pass over you like stamping kine, 
Like ox or horse teams cruelly iron-shod, 
Hippolyta, turn your blest face toward mine, Y
ou, dearer to my heart than self or God.

Your eyes are stars across soft azure nights, 
One look from you and I shall lift extreme 
Veils to reveal the subtlest of delights, 
Cradling you gently in an endless dream."

Hippolyta then raised her youthful head:
-- "No ingrate, I repent not in the least, 
Delphine, but I feel choked and ill," she said, 
"As after some galling nocturnal feast.

I feel grim fears, I reel under their loads, 
While black battalions of sparse phantoms stride, 
Eager to lead me down dire, shifting roads, 
Which bloody sky-rims block on every side.

What could be strange in what we did tonight? 
Why all my worries and discomfitures? 
You call me "Angel" and I start with fright, 
And yet I feel my mouth straining for yours!

Do not look at me thus, sister to whom 
By choice I pledged eternal adoration, 
Even were you a snare set for my doom 
And the first instrument of my damnation."

Shaking her tragic mane, rapt, fatal-eyed, 
Stamping her foot as on the Tripod of 
The Oracle, Delphine, despotic, cried:
-- "Who dares to speak of hell when faced with love?

Curst be the first vain dreamer who evolved 
A sterile code of laws and stupidly 
Thrilled by vexed problems that cannot be solved 
Sought to compound love and morality.

He who would couple in a mystic mesh 
Coolness with heat and marry day with night 
Shall never warm his palsy-stricken flesh 
In that red sun which is our love's delight.

Go find a stupid lover, do not fail
To yield your chaste heart to his harsh requests,
Then horrified, remorseful, ashen-pale,
Return to me with bruised stigmatic breasts.

Woman on earth can serve only one master!... "
But the girl answered: "All my senses smart!
I feel sharp premonitions of disaster, 
A pit yawns in me, and that pit, my heart!

Volcano-hot and deep as nullity, 
Nothing will stay this monster's headlong flood 
Nor slake the thirst of that Eumenide 
Who, torch in hand, consumes his very blood.

Let our drawn curtains screen us from alarms, 
And let our lassitude bring us full rest, 
I wish to die between your sinewy arms 
And find the cool of tombs upon your breast."

Go down, go down, sad victims to the climes
Of an eternal hell, all hope is dead;
Down the unfathomed pit where all known crimes,
Lashed by a wind no heaven ever bred,

Boil to the fury of the tempest's blast. 
The goal of your desires shall turn to dust, 
Mad, raging shades, unsated to the last, 
Your very punishment born of your lust.

No ray shall light the caverns of your shame, 
Fevered miasms filtering through the chinks 
Shall suddenly like lamps burst into flame, 
Steeping your bodies in a sweat that stinks.

The bleak sterility of your lewd fires 
Heightens your thirst and tightens skins that sag, 
As the wild wind of lecherous desires 
Makes your flesh flap like a moth-eaten flag.

Outcast and damned, wandering the far poles, 
Like wolves the frozen wilderness disparts, 
Follow your destiny, disordered souls, 
And flee the infinite that fills your hearts.

Damned Women

Lying on the sand like ruminating cattle, 
They turn their eyes toward the horizon of the sea, 
And their clasped hands and their feet which seek the other's 
Know both sweet languor and shudders of pain.

Some, whose hearts grew amorous from long confessions, 
In the depth of the woods, among the babbling brooks, 
Spell out the love of their timid adolescence 
By carving the green wood of young saplings;

Others, like sisters, walk gravely and with slow steps 
Among the high rocks peopled with apparitions, 
Where Saint Anthony saw the naked, purple breasts 
Of his temptations rise up like lava;

There are some who by the light of crumbling resin 
In the silent void of the old pagan caverns 
Call out for help from their screaming fevers to you 
O Bacchus, who lull to sleep the ancient remorse!

And others, whose breasts love the feel of scapulars, 
Who, concealing a whip under their long habits, 
Mingle, in the dark woods and solitary nights, 
The froth of pleasure with tears of torment.

O virgins, O demons, O monsters, O martyrs,
Great spirits, contemptuous of reality,
Seekers of the infinite, pious and satyric,
Sometimes full of cries, sometimes full of tears,

You whom my spirit has followed into your hell,
Poor sisters, I love you as much as I pity you,
For your gloomy sorrows, your unsatisfied thirsts,
And the urns of love with which your great hearts are filled!

Damned Women

Like pensive cattle lying on the sand 
They scan the far horizon of the ocean, 
Foot seeking foot, hand magnetising hand, 
With sweet or bitter tremors of emotion.

Some with their hearts absorbed in confidences, 
Deep in the woods, where streamlets chatter free, 
Spell the loved names of childish, timid fancies, 
And carve the green wood of the fresh, young tree.

Others, like sisters wander, slow and grave, 
Through craggy haunts of ghostly emanations, 
Where once Saint Anthony was wont to brave 
The purple-breasted pride of his temptations.

Some by the light of resin-scented torches 
In the dumb hush of caverns seek their shrine, 
Invoking Bacchus, killer of remorses, 
To liven their delirium with wine.

Others who deal with scapulars and hoods 
Hiding the whiplash under their long train, 
Mingle, on lonely nights in sombre woods, 
The foam of pleasure with the tears of pain.

O demons, monsters, virgins, martyrs, you
Who trample base reality in scorn,
Whether as nuns or satyrs you pursue
The infinite, with cries or tears forlorn,

You, whom my soul has tracked to lairs infernal, 
Poor sisterhood, I pity and adore, 
For your despairing griefs, your thirst eternal, 
And love that floods your hearts for evermore!

Condemned Women

Like thoughtful cattle on the yellow sands reclined, 
They turn their eyes towards the horizon of the sea, 
Their feet towards each other stretched, their hands entwined, 
They tell of gentle yearning, frigid misery. 

A few, with heart-confiding faith of old, imbued 
Amid the darkling grove, where silver streamlets flow, 
Unfold to each their loves of tender infanthood, 
And carve the verdant stems of the vine-kissed portico. 

And others like unto nuns with footsteps slow and grave, 
Ascend the hallowed rocks of ancient mystic lore, 
Where long ago -- St. Anthony, like a surging wave, 
The naked purpled breasts of his temptation saw. 

And still some more, that 'neath the shimmering masses stroll, 
Among the silent chasm of some pagan caves, 
To soothe their burning fevers unto thee they call 
O Bacchus! who all ancient wounds and sorrow laves. 

And others again, whose necks in scapulars delight, 
Who hide a whip beneath their garments secretly, 
Commingling, in the sombre wood and lonesome night, 
The foam of torments and of tears with ecstasy. 

O virgins, demons, monsters, and O martyred brood! 
Great souls that mock Reality with remorseless sneers, 
O saints and satyrs, searchers for infinitude! 
At times so full of shouts, at times so full of tears! 

You, to whom within your hell my spirit flies, 
Poor sisters -- yea, I love you as I pity you, 
For your unsatiated thirsts and anguished sighs, 
And for the vials of love within your hearts so true. 

Damned Women

They lie like pensive cattle on the sands, 
And as their gaze to the far sea's edge clings, 
Their feet which twine, and their enclasped hands 
Suffer sweet swoons and bitter shudderings. 

But some, enamoured of long converse, stray 
Where the streams wander through the coppices, 
Spell out the loves of timid childhood's day, 
And carve the green wood of the little trees. 

Others like sisters wander slow and grave 
Across the rocks where phantom shapes flit dim, 
Where Anthony saw, surging wave on wave. 
The naked purple breasts which tempted him. 

Some there are who, by crumbling torches' light 
In the dumb gulfs of pagan caverns deep. 
Pray thee to put their fever-throes to flight, 
Bacchus! who drownest old remorse in sleep. 

And others, fain of scapularies, roam 
With a long whip beneath their garments' fold, 
And in lone woods at midnight mingle foam 
Of joy with cries of anguish manifold. 

O virgins, demons, monsters, martyrs! ye 
Who scorn reality through all the years; 
Soiled holy ones who seek infinity 
So full of cries and, ah! so full of tears! 

Poor sisters whom my soul has tracked in hell, 
I love you and I weep for all your woe: 
Your burning thirst, your pains unspeakable. 
The wells of love with which your hearts o'erflow. 

The Accursed

Like pensive herds at rest upon the sands,
These to the sea-horizons turn their eyes;
Out of their folded feet and clinging hands
Bitter sharp tremblings and soft languors rise.

Some tread the thicket by the babbling stream,
Their hearts with untold secrets ill at ease;
Calling the lover of their childhood's dream,
They wound the green bark of the shooting trees.

Others like sisters wander, grave and slow,
Among the rocks haunted by spectres thin,
Where Antony saw as larvae surge and flow
The veined bare breasts that tempted him to sin.

Some, when the resinous torch of burning wood
Flares in lost pagan caverns dark and deep,
Call thee to quench the fever in their blood,
Bacchus, who singest old remorse to sleep!

Then there are those the scapular bedights,
Whose long white vestments hide the whip's red stain,
Who mix, in sombre woods on lonely nights,
The foam of pleasure with the tears of pain.

O virgins, demons, monsters, martyrs! ye
Who scorn whatever actual appears;
Saints, satyrs, seekers of Infinity,
So full of cries, so full of bitter tears;

Ye whom my soul has followed into hell,
I love and pity, O sad sisters mine,
Your thirsts unquenched, your pains no tongue can tell,
And your great hearts, those urns of love divine!

The Damned Women

Lounging like pensive cattle on the sand, 
They turn their eyes to the horizon of seas, 
And their feet seek each other and their close hands 
Now languish with softness, now quiver with gall.

Some, their hearts captivated by slow secrets 
In the depths of bushes chattering with streams, 
Go gathering the first loves of timid childhoods 
Exploring the green wood of tender trees;

Others, like nuns, slow and grave, move 
Over rocks swarming with visions, 
Where St. Anthony saw rise up the lava 
Of the purple naked breasts of his temptations;

There are some who, to the resin's shaking glimmer, 
Call, from the silent hollows of old pagan caverns, 
To you, O Bacchus, who soothe remorse, 
For help out of their shouting fevers.

And others, whose bosoms crave the scapular, 
Who hide a whip under their long clothes 
And mingle, in the dismal wood and lonely night, 
The foam of pleasure with the twists of pain.

To you, virgins, demons, monsters, martyrs,
To your great spirits spurning reality,
Searchers of the infinite, devotees and satyrs,
Now full of cries, now full of tears,

To you whom to your hell my soul has followed
My poor sisters, I give you my love and pity,
For your dark sorrows, your unslakeable thirsts,
And the caskets of your love of which your hearts are full!

The Two Good Sisters

Debauchery and Death are two lovable girls, 
Lavish with their kisses and rich with health, 
Whose ever-virgin loins, draped with tattered clothes and 
Burdened with constant work, have never given birth.

To the sinister poet, foe of families, 
Poorly paid courtier, favorite of hell, 
Graves and brothels show beneath their bowers 
A bed in which remorse has never slept.

The bier and the alcove, fertile in blasphemies 
Like two good sisters, offer to us in turn 
Terrible pleasures and frightful sweetness.

When will you bury me, Debauch with the filthy arms? 
Death, her rival in charms, when will you come 
To graft black cypress on her infected myrtle?

The Two Good Sisters

Debauchery and Death are pleasant twins, 
And lavish with their charms, a buxom pair!
Under the rags that clothe their virgin skins, 
Their wombs, though still in labour, never bear.

For the curst poet, foe to married rest, 
The friend of hell, and courtier on half-pay -- 
Brothels and tombs reserve for such a guest 
A bed on which repentance never lay.

Both tomb and bed, in blasphemy so fecund 
Each other's hospitality to second, 
Prepare grim treats, and hatch atrocious things.

Debauch, when will you bury me? When, Death, 
Mingle your Cypress in the selfsame wreath 
With the infected Myrtles that she brings?

The Fountain of Blood

It seems to me at times my blood flows out in waves 
Like a fountain that gushes in rhythmical sobs. 
I hear it clearly, escaping with long murmurs, 
But I feel my body in vain to find the wound.

Across the city, as in a tournament field, 
It courses, making islands of the paving stones, 
Satisfying the thirst of every creature 
And turning the color of all nature to red.

I have often asked insidious wines 
To lull to sleep for a day my wasting terror; 
Wine makes the eye sharper, the ear more sensitive!

I have sought in love a forgetful sleep; 
But love is to me only a bed of needles 
Made to slake the thirst of those cruel prostitutes!

The Fountain of Blood

My blood in waves seems sometimes to be spouting 
As though in rhythmic sobs a fountain swooned. 
I hear its long, low, rushing sound till, doubting, 
I feel myself all over for the wound.

Across the town, as in the lists of battle, 
It flows, transforming paving stones to isles, 
Slaking the thirst of creatures, men, and cattle, 
And colouring all nature red for miles.

Sometimes I've sought relief in precious wines 
To lull in me the fear that undermines, 
But found they sharpened every sense the more.

I've also sought forgetfulness in lust, 
But love's a bed of needles, and they thrust 
To give more drink to each rapacious whore.

The Fountain of Blood

It seems to me sometimes my blood is bubbling out 
As fountains do, in rhythmic sobs; I feel it spout 
And lapse; I hear it plainly; it makes a murmuring sound; 
But from what wound it wells, so far I have not found.

As blood runs in the lists, round tumbled armored bones, 
It soaks the city, islanding the paving-stones; 
Everything thirsty leans to lap it, with stretched head; 
Trees suck it up; it stains their trunks and branches red.

I turn to wine for respite, I drink, and I drink deep; 
(Just for one day, one day, neither to see nor hear!) 
Wine only renders sharper the frantic eye and ear.

In terror I cry to love, "Oh, put my mind to sleep!" 
But love for me is only a mattress where I shrink 
On needles, and my blood is given to whores to drink.

Allegory

She's a beautiful woman with opulent shoulders 
Who lets her long hair trail in her goblet of wine. 
The claws of love, the poisons of brothels, 
All slips and all is blunted on her granite skin. 
She laughs at Death and snaps her fingers at Debauch. 
The hands of those monsters, ever cutting and scraping, 
Have respected nonetheless the pristine majesty 
Of her firm, straight body at its destructive games. 
She walks like a goddess, rests like a sultana; 
She has a Mohammedan's faith in pleasure 
And to her open arms which are filled by her breasts, 
She lures all mortals with her eyes. 
She believes, she knows, this virgin, sterile 
And yet essential to the march of the world, 
That a beautiful body is a sublime gift 
That wrings a pardon for any foul crime. 
She is unaware of Hell and Purgatory 
And when the time comes for her to enter 
The black Night, she will look into the face of Death 
As a new-born child, -- without hatred or remorse.

Allegory

She is a woman of appearance fine 
Who lets her tresses trail into her wine. 
Love's claws and poisons, brewed in sinks of sin, 
Fall blunted from the granite of her skin. 
She mocks Debauchery, Death leaves her blithe, 
Two monsters always handy with the scythe. 
In their grim games, where so much beauty's wrecked, 
They treat her majesty with due respect. 
Half goddess, half sultana, without scathe, 
In pleasure she's a Moslem's steady faith. 
Between her open arms, filled by her breasts, 
For all mankind with burning eyes she quests, 
And she believes, this fruitless virgin-wife, 
Who's yet so necessary to this life, 
That beauty of the body is a gift 
Sublime enough all infamy to shift, 
And win forgiveness. She knows naught of Hell. 
When the Night comes, in which she is to dwell, 
Straight in the face she'll look her deadly Fate, 
Like one new-born -- without remorse or hate.

An Allegory

Here is a woman, richly clad and fair,
Who in her wine dips her long, heavy hair;
Love's claws, and that sharp poison which is sin,
Are dulled against the granite of her skin.
Death she defies, Debauch she smiles upon,
For their sharp scythe-like talons every one
Pass by her in their all-destructive play;
Leaving her beauty till a later day.
Goddess she walks; sultana in her leisure;
She has Mohammed's faith that heaven is pleasure,
And bids all men forget the world's alarms
Upon her breast, between her open arms.
She knows, and she believes, this sterile maid,
Without whom the world's onward dream would fade,
That bodily beauty is the supreme gift
Which may from every sin the terror lift.
Hell she ignores, and Purgatory defies;
And when black Night shall roll before her eyes,
She will look straight in Death's grim face forlorn,
Without remorse or hate -- as one new-born.

Beatrice

One day as I was making complaint to nature 
In a burnt, ash-gray land without vegetation, 
And as I wandered aimlessly, slowly whetting 
Upon my heart the dagger of my thought, 
I saw in broad daylight descending on my head 
A leaden cloud, pregnant with a tempest, 
That carried a herd of vicious demons 
Who resembled curious, cruel dwarfs. 
They began to look at me coldly, 
And I heard them laugh and whisper to each other, 
Exchanging many a sign and many a wink 
Like passers-by who discuss a fool they admire:

-- "Let us look leisurely at this caricature, 
This shade of Hamlet who imitates his posture 
With indecisive look, hair streaming in the wind. 
Is it not a pity to see this bon vivant, 
This tramp, this queer fish, this actor without a job, 
Because he knows how to play skillfully his role, 
Wish to interest in the song of his woes 
The eagles, the crickets, the brooks, and the flowers, 
And even to us, authors of that hackneyed drivel, 
Bellow the recital of his public tirades?"

I could have (my pride as high as mountains 
Dominates the clouds and the cries of the demons) 
Simply turned away my sovereign head 
If I had not seen in that obscene troop 
A crime which did not make the sun reel in its course! 
The queen of my heart with the peerless gaze 
Laughing with them at my somber distress 
And giving them at times a lewd caress.

Beatrice

In charred and ashen fields without a leaf,
While I alone to Nature told my grief,
I sharpened, as I went, like any dart,
My thought upon the grindstone of my heart -- 
When by a troop of vicious demons led,
A great black cloud rushed down towards my head.
As loafers at a lunatic they leered
And in my face inquisitively peered.
With nods and signs, like dwarfed and apish elves,
They laughed, and winked, and spoke among themselves.

"This parody of Hamlet, take his measure, 
And contemplate the travesty at leisure. 
Is it not sad to see the puzzled stare, 
The halting gait, and the dishevelled hair 
With which this clownish actor, on half-pay, 
Because he is an artist in his way, 
Attempts to interest, in the griefs he sings, 
Eagles, and crickets, flowers, and running springs, 
And even us, the authors of his woe, 
Howling his sorrows as a public show?"

I could have dominated with my pride 
That horde of demons and the taunts they cried, 
Just by the mere aversion of my face -- 
Had I not seen, amongst that evil race, 
(A crime that did not even daze the sun!) 
Queen of my heart, the peerless, only one, 
Laughing with them to see my dark distress, 
And giving them, at times, some lewd caress.

My Beatrice

While I was walking in a pitted place,
crying aloud against the human race,
letting thoughts ramble here and there apart --
knives singing on the whetstones in my heart --
I saw a cloud descending on my head
in the full noon, a cloud inhabited
by black devils, sharp, humped, inquisitive
as dwarfs. They knew where I was sensitive,
now idling there, and looked me up and down,
as cool delinquents watch a madman clown.
I heard them laugh and snicker blasphemies,
while swapping signs and blinking with their eyes.

"Let's stop and watch this creature at our leisure --
all sighs and sweaty hair. We'll take his measure.
It's a great pity that this mountebank
and ghost of Hamlet strutting on his plank
should think he's such an artist at his role
he has to rip the lining from his soul
and paralyze the butterflies and bees
with a peepshow of his indecencies --
and even we, who gave him his education,
must listen to his schoolboy declamation."

Wishing to play a part (my pride was high
above the mountains and the devil's cry)
like Hamlet now, I would have turned my back,
had I not seen among the filthy pack
(Oh crime that should have made the sun drop dead!)
my heart's queen and the mistress of my bed
there purring with the rest at my distress,
and sometimes tossing them a stale caress.

Beatrice

In a burned-over land, where not a blade or leaf 
Showed green, through a charred world, whetting my ancient grief 
Slowly upon my heart, and making sad lament 
To Nature, at broad noon, not knowing where I went, 
I walked... and saw above me a big cloud -- which at first 
I took to be a storm -- blacken, and swell and burst, 
And pour upon my head instead of rain a rout 
Of demons, dwarfed and cruel, which ringed me all about. 
As passersby, no matter upon what errands bent, 
Will always stop and stare with cold astonishment 
At some poor man gone mad, then bait him wittily, 
Just so they gaped and nudged, and jeered aloud at me.

-- "Come! Have a look at this! What is it, should you say?
The shade of Hamlet -- why, of course! -- look at the way
He stands! -- that undecided eye! -- the wild hair, too!
Come here! Do look! Oh, wouldn't it wring a tear from you!
This shabby bon-vivant, this pompous tramp, this ham-
Actor out of a job, thinking that he can cram,
By ranting, stale gesticulations, crocodile-tears,
His tragic fate into the ears of crickets, into the ears
Of eagles! -- yes, who knows? -- along with brooks and flowers
Forgetting we invented these tricks, even into ours!"

But for one thing -- no mountain is taller than my pride; 
No demon horde can scale me -- I could have turned aside 
My sovereign thought, and stood alone... had I not seen 
Suddenly, amongst this loathsome troupe, <i>her,</i> my heart's queen -- 
And the sun did not reel, it stood unmoved above! -- 
Her of the pure deep gaze, my life, my peerless love, 
Mocking and pointing, laughing at my acute distress; 
Or fondling some foul dwarf in an obscene caress.

La Beatrice

In a burnt, ashen land, where no herb grew,
I to the winds my cries of anguish threw;
And in my thoughts, in that sad place apart,
Pricked gently with the poignard o'er my heart.
Then in full noon above my head a cloud
Descended tempest-swollen, and a crowd
Of wild, lascivious spirits huddled there,
The cruel and curious demons of the air,
Who coldly to consider me began;
Then, as a crowd jeers some unhappy man,
Exchanging gestures, winking with their eyes -- 
I heard a laughing and a whispering rise:

"Let us at leisure contemplate this clown,
This shadow of Hamlet aping Hamlet's frown,
With wandering eyes and hair upon the wind.
Is't not a pity that this empty mind,
This tramp, this actor out of work, this droll,
Because he knows how to assume a rôle
Should dream that eagles and insects, streams and woods,
Stand still to hear him chaunt his dolorous moods?
Even unto us, who made these ancient things,
The fool his public lamentation sings."
With pride as lofty as the towering cloud,
I would have stilled these clamouring demons loud,
And turned in scorn my sovereign head away
Had I not seen -- O sight to dim the day! -- 
There in the middle of the troupe obscene
The proud and peerless beauty of my Queen!
She laughed with them at all my dark distress,
And gave to each in turn a vile caress.

The Vampire's Metamorphoses

The woman meanwhile, twisting like a snake 
On hot coals and kneading her breasts against the steel 
Of her corset, from her mouth red as strawberries 
Let flow these words impregnated with musk:
-- "I, I have moist lips, and I know the art 
Of losing old Conscience in the depths of a bed. 
I dry all tears on my triumphant breasts 
And make old men laugh with the laughter of children. 
I replace, for him who sees me nude, without veils, 
The moon, the sun, the stars and the heavens! 
I am, my dear scholar, so learned in pleasure 
That when I smother a man in my fearful arms, 
Or when, timid and licentious, frail and robust, 
I yield my bosom to biting kisses 
On those two soft cushions which swoon with emotion, 
The powerless angels would damn themselves for me!"

When she had sucked out all the marrow from my bones 
And I languidly turned toward her 
To give back an amorous kiss, I saw no more 
Than a wine-skin with gluey sides, all full of pus! 
Frozen with terror, I closed both my eyes, 
And when I opened them to the bright light, 
At my side, instead of the robust manikin 
Who seemed to have laid in a store of blood, 
There quivered confusedly a heap of old bones, 
Which of themselves gave forth the cry of a weather-cock 
Or of a sign on the end of an iron rod 
That the wind swings to and fro on a winter night.

The Metamorphoses of the Vampire

The crimson-fruited mouth that I desired -- 
While, like a snake on coals, she twinged and twired, 
Kneading her breasts against her creaking busk -- 
Let fall those words impregnated with musk, 
-- "My lips are humid: by my learned science, 
All conscience, in my bed, becomes compliance. 
My breasts, triumphant, staunch all tears; for me 
Old men, like little children, laugh with glee. 
For those who see me naked, I replace 
Sun, moon, the sky, and all the stars in space. 
I am so skilled, dear sage, in arts of pleasure, 
That, when with man my deadly arms I measure, 
Or to his teeth and kisses yield my bust, 
Timid yet lustful, fragile, yet robust, 
On sheets that swoon with passion -- you might see 
Impotent angels damn themselves for me."

When of my marrow she had sucked each bone 
And, languishing, I turned with loving moan 
To kiss her in return, with overplus,
She seemed a swollen wineskin, full of pus. 
I shut my eyes with horror at the sight, 
But when I opened them, in the clear light, 
I saw, instead of the great swollen doll 
That, bloated with my lifeblood, used to loll, 
The debris of a skeleton, assembling 
With shrill squawks of a weathercock, lie trembling, 
Or sounds, with which the howling winds commingle, 
Of an old Inn-sign on a rusty tringle.

Metamorphoses of the Vampire

Meanwhile from her red mouth the woman, in husky tones,
Twisting her body like a serpent upon hot stones
And straining her white breasts from their imprisonment,
Let fall these words, as potent as a heavy scent:
"My lips are moist and yielding, and I know the way
To keep the antique demon of remorse at bay.
All sorrows die upon my bosom. I can make
Old men laugh happily as children for my sake.
For him who sees me naked in my tresses, I
Replace the sun, the moon, and all the stars of the sky!
Believe me, learned sir, I am so deeply skilled
That when I wind a lover in my soft arms, and yield
My breasts like two ripe fruits for his devouring -- both
Shy and voluptuous, insatiable and loath -- 
Upon this bed that groans and sighs luxuriously
Even the impotent angels would be damned for me!"

When she had drained me of my very marrow, and cold 
And weak, I turned to give her one more kiss -- behold, 
There at my side was nothing but a hideous 
Putrescent thing, all faceless and exuding pus.
I closed my eyes and mercifully swooned till day: 
And when I looked at morning for that beast of prey 
Who seemed to have replenished her arteries from my own, 
The wan, disjointed fragments of a skeleton 
Wagged up and down in a lewd posture where she had lain, 
Rattling with each convulsion like a weathervane 
Or an old sign that creaks upon its bracket, right 
Mournfully in the wind upon a winter's night.

Metamorphoses of a Vampire

Meanwhile the woman, writhing like a snake 
On fiery coals, kneaded her breasts to make 
Them hug their steely corset; and she said, 
Her lips redder than strawberries are red:

"Behold, my mouth is moist, and on my deep
Couch I can lull grim Conscience fast asleep,
I dry all tears on my triumphant breasts,
Where old men laugh like boys at boyish jests.
For him who sees me naked, I comprise
All moons and suns and stars and clouds and skies!
I am so skilled, fond scholar, in love's charms
That when I hug you in my ruthless arms,
Or, shy and lustful, frail and forceful, when
I yield taut nipples to the teeth of men,
My bosom's pillows, palpitant, would doom
Angels to ruin for coveting my womb..."

When she had sucked my marrow dry, I turned,
Languid, to give her back the kiss she earned,
Only to view, I fond and amorous,
A viscid wineskin, nidorous with pus...

Frozen with fear, I shut my eyelids tight, 
Then, opening them against the garish light, 
I saw no solid puppet by my side 
Whose lusts my blood, drained dry, had satisfied, 
But a debris of quavering bone on bone, 
Moaning as only weathervanes can moan, 
And creaking as a rusty signpost might 
Lashed by the furies of a winter night.

The Metamorphoses of the Vampire

Then the woman with the strawberry mouth,
Squirming like a snake upon the coals,
Kneading her breasts against the iron of her corset,
Let flow these words scented with musk:
 -- "I have wet lips, and I know the art
Of losing old conscience in the depths of a bed.
I dry all tears on my triumphing breasts
And I make old men laugh with the laughter of children.
For those who see me naked, without any covering,
I am the moon and the sun and the sky and the stars!
I am so dexterous in voluptuous love, my dear, my wise one,
When I strangle a man in my dreadful arms,
Or abandon my breast to his biting,
So shy and lascivious, so frail and vigorous,
That on these cushions that swoon with passion
The powerless angels damn their souls for me!"

When she had sucked the pith from my bones 
And, drooping, I turned towards her 
To give her the kiss of love, I saw only 
An old leather bottle with sticky sides and full of pus! 
I shut both eyes in cold dismay 
And when I opened them both to clear reality, 
By my side, instead of that powerful puppet 
Which seemed to have taken some lease of blood, 
There shook vaguely the remains of a skeleton, 
Which itself gave the cry of a weathercock 
Or of a sign-board, at the end of a rod of iron, 
Which the wind swings in winter nights.

A Voyage to Cythera

My heart like a bird was fluttering joyously 
And soaring freely around the rigging; 
Beneath a cloudless sky the ship was rolling 
Like an angel drunken with the radiant sun.

What is this black, gloomy island? -- It's Cythera, 
They tell us, a country celebrated in song, 
The banal Eldorado of old bachelors. 
Look at it; after all, it is a wretched land.

-- Island of sweet secrets, of the heart's festivals!
The beautiful shade of ancient Venus 
Hovers above your seas like a perfume 
And fills all minds with love and languidness.

Fair isle of green myrtle filled with full-blown flowers
Ever venerated by all nations,
Where the sighs of hearts in adoration
Roll like incense over a garden of roses

Or like the eternal cooing of wood-pigeons!
-- Cythera was now no more than the barrenest land,
A rocky desert disturbed by shrill cries.
But I caught a glimpse of a singular object!

It was not a temple in the shade of a grove 
Where the youthful priestess, amorous of flowers, 
Was walking, her body hot with hidden passion, 
Half-opening her robe to the passing breezes;

But behold! as we passed, hugging the shore 
So that we disturbed the sea-birds with our white sails, 
We saw it was a gallows with three arms 
Outlined in black like a cypress against the sky.

Ferocious birds perched on their feast were savagely 
Destroying the ripe corpse of a hanged man; 
Each plunged his filthy beak as though it were a tool 
Into every corner of that bloody putrescence;

The eyes were two holes and from the gutted belly 
The heavy intestines hung down along his thighs 
And his torturers, gorged with hideous delights, 
Had completely castrated him with their sharp beaks.

Below his feet a pack of jealous quadrupeds 
Prowled with upraised muzzles and circled round and round; 
One beast, larger than the others, moved in their midst 
Like a hangman surrounded by his aides.

Cytherean, child of a sky so beautiful, 
You endured those insults in silence 
To expiate your infamous adorations 
And the sins which denied to you a grave.

Ridiculous hanged man, your sufferings are mine! 
I felt at the sight of your dangling limbs 
The long, bitter river of my ancient sorrows 
Rise up once more like vomit to my teeth;

Before you, poor devil of such dear memory 
I felt all the stabbing beaks of the crows 
And the jaws of the black panthers who loved so much 
In other days to tear my flesh to shreds.

-- The sky was charming and the sea was smooth; 
For me thenceforth all was black and bloody, 
Alas! and I had in that allegory 
Wrapped up my heart as in a heavy shroud.

On your isle, O Venus! I found upright only 
A symbolic gallows from which hung my image...
O! Lord! give me the strength and the courage 
To contemplate my body and soul without loathing!

Voyage to Cytherea

My heart, a bird, seemed joyfully to fly 
And round the rigging cruised with nimble gyre. 
The vessel rolled beneath the cloudless sky 
Like a white angel, drunk with solar fire.

What is that sad, black island like a pall? 
Why, Cytherea, famed in many a book, 
The Eldorado of old-stagers. Look: 
It's but a damned poor country after all!

Isle of sweet secrets and heart-feasting fire! 
Of antique Venus the majestic ghost 
Rolls like a storm of fragrance from your coast 
Filling our souls with languor and desire!

Isle of green myrtles, where each flower uncloses,
Adored by nations till the end of time:
Sighs of adoring hearts, like incense, climb.
And pour their perfume over sheaves of roses,

Or groves of turtles in an endless coo! 
But no! it was a waste where nothing grows, 
Torn only by the raucous cries of crows: 
Yet there a curious object rose in view.

This was no temple hid in bosky trees, 
Where the young priestess, amorous of flowers, 
Whom secretly a loving flame devours, 
Walks with her robe half-open to the breeze.

For as we moved inshore to coast the shallows 
And our white canvas scared the crows to fly, 
Like a tall cypress, blackened on the sky, 
We saw it was a gaunt three-forking gallows.

Fierce birds, perched on their meal, began to slash 
And rip with rage a rotten corpse that swung. 
Each screwed and chiselled with its beak among 
The crisp and bleeding crannies of the hash.

His eyes were holes: from open stomach direly 
His heavy tripes cascaded to his thighs. 
Gorged with such ghastly dainties to the eyes, 
His torturers had gelded him entirely.

Beneath, some jealous prowling quadrupeds, 
With lifted muzzles, for the leavings scrambled. 
The largest seemed, as in the midst he gambolled, 
An executioner among his aides.

Native of Cytherea's cloudless clime 
In silent suffering you paid the price, 
And expiated ancient cults of vice 
With generations of forbidden crime.

Ridiculous hanged man! Your griefs I know. 
I felt, to see you swing above the heath, 
Like nausea slowly rising to my teeth, 
The bilious stream of ancient human woe.

Poor devil, dear to memory! before me 
I seemed to feel each talon, fang, and beak 
Of all the stinking crows and panthers sleek 
That in my lifetime ever chewed and tore me.

The sky was charming and the sea unclouded, 
But all was black and bloody to my mind. 
As in a dismal winding-sheet entwined, 
My heart was in this allegory shrouded.

A gallows where my image hung apart
Was all I found on Venus' isle of sighs.
O God, give me the strength to scrutinise,
Without disgust, my body and my heart!

A Voyage to Cythera

My heart, that seemed a bird, was flying in the sun 
Before the mast -- was flying joyously ahead: 
The ship, too, like an angel, all her sails outspread, 
Calmly beneath the unclouded sky flew on and on.

What is that somber island? what dreary port of call? 
"Cythera," someone laughs -- "the legend of the seas, 
Time-honoured Eldorado of aging debauchees. 
Look! It is only a poor, bleak country, after all."

-- O island of sweet revels and the sounding lyre!
O shore of unimaginable secrets, where
The shade of Venus walks upon the twilight air,
Drugging the very soul with languor and desire!

O island of green myrtles never withering!
Thy long renown, by every human tongue confessed,
To the far-scattered nations of the east and west
Is wafted, like the perfume of an endless spring

Or like a dove's nostalgic and eternal moan!
-- Cythera had become, in truth, a wretched land, 
A sullen desert glittering with rock and sand: 
I saw along those shores one sign of life alone.

It was no antique temple nor the ruin thereof, 
Where a young priestess wanders, her light robes unpent, 
Confusing with the scent of flowers the virgin scent 
Of her slim body secretly aflame for love.

No; but we could see clearly, having come so nigh 
That the shore-birds were scolding and beating upon our sails, 
A solitary gibbet constructed of three rails, 
Funereal as a tall dead cypress against the sky.

Some vultures were destroying with energy and address 
A hanged man, ripe already by perhaps a week -- 
Each planting carefully, like a sharp tool, his beak 
In every comer of that dangling rottenness.

The eyes were holes; from the torn groin meandering 
On to the thighs, streamed down the intestines blue and bright; 
Not to be cheated of any possible delight, 
Those birds had absolutely castrated the poor thing.

Below, a pack of jealous wolves, impatient for 
The still suspended, speedily diminishing feast, 
Wove round with lifted muzzles. One gigantic beast 
Was like an executioner among his corps.

Son of Cythera! remnant of a world so brave! 
How silently, with thy black hollow eyes of woe, 
Didst thou hang there, in payment for I do not know 
What desperate crime forbidding thee an honest grave.

Helpless and abject creature! Who art thou but I? 
Beholding thee, I could feel rise into my breast, 
Like a long bitter vomit, all the sick repressed 
Griefs and humiliations of the years gone by.

At sight of thee, poor devil, I could feel the whole 
Rage of the past upon me -- every beak and tooth 
Of those wild birds and animals that in my youth 
Loved tirelessly to lacerate my flesh and soul.

-- The sea was calm and beautiful, the sky was clear: 
What shadow covered them and hid them from my eyes? 
The shadow cast by that symbolic tree! It lies 
Upon my heart like a black pall for ever, I fear.

Naught else, O Venus, in thy whole dominion -- just
That mournful allegory to greet me, in my hour.
Almighty God! Give me the courage and the power
To contemplate my own true image without disgust!

A Voyage to Cythera

My heart was like a bird and took to flight, 
Around the rigging circling joyously; 
The ship rolled on beneath a cloudless sky 
Like a great angel drunken with the light. 

"What is yon isle, sad and funereal?"
"Cythera, famed in deathless song," say they, 
"The gay old bachelors' Eldorado -- Nay, 
Look! 'tis a poor bare country after all!"

Isle of sweet secrets and heart banquetings! 
The queenly shade of antique Venus thrills 
Scentlike above thy level seas and fills 
Our souls with languor and all amorous things. 

Fair island of green myrtles and blown flowers 
Held holy by all men for evermore. 
Where the faint sighs of spirits that adore 
Float like rose-incense through the quiet hours, 

And dovelike sounds each murmured orison: -- 
Cythera lay there barren 'neath bright skies, 
A rocky waste rent by discordant cries: 
Natheless I saw a curious thing thereon. 

No shady temple was it, close enshrined 
I' the trees; no flower-crowned priestess hither came 
With her young body burnt by secret flame, 
Baring her breast to the caressing wind; 

But when so close to the land's edge we drew 
Our canvas scared the sea-fowl -- gradually 
We knew it for a three-branched gallows tree 
Like a black cypress stark against the blue. 

A rotten carcase hung, whereon did sit 
A swarm of foul black birds; with writhe and shriek 
Each sought to pierce and plunge his knife-like beak 
Deep in the bleeding trunk and limbs of it. 

The eyes were holes; the belly opened wide, 
Streaming its heavy entrails on the thighs; 
The grim birds, gorged with dreadful delicacies. 
Had dug and furrowed it on every side.

Beneath the blackened feet there strove and pressed 
A herd of jealous beasts with upward snout, 
And in the midst of these there turned about 
One, the chief hangman, larger than the rest...

Lone Cytherean! now all silently 
Thou sufferest these insults to atone 
For those old infamous sins that thou hast known, 
The sins that locked the gate o' the grave to thee. 

Mine are thy sorrows, ludicrous corse; yea, all 
Are mine! I stood thy swaying limbs beneath, 
And, like a bitter vomit, to my teeth 
There rose old sorrows in a stream of gall. 

O thou unhappy devil, I felt afresh, 
Gazing at thee, the beaks and jaws of those 
Black savage panthers and those ruthless crows, 
Who loved of old to macerate my flesh. 

The sea was calm, the sky without a cloud; 
Henceforth for me all things that came to pass 
Were blood and darkness, -- round my heart, alas! 
There clung that allegory, like a shroud. 

Naught save mine image on a gibbet thrust 
Found I on Venus island desolate...
Ah, God! the courage and strength to contemplate 
My body and my heart without disgust! 

Cupid and the Skull

An Old Lamp Base

Cupid is seated on the skull 
Of Humanity;
On this throne the impious one 
With the shameless laugh

Is gaily blowing round bubbles
That rise in the air
As if they would rejoin the globes 
At the ether's end.

The sphere, fragile and luminous,
Takes flight rapidly,
Bursts	and spits out its flimsy soul 
Like a golden dream.

I hear the skull groan and entreat 
At every bubble:
"When is this fierce, ludicrous game 
To come to an end?

Because what your pitiless mouth
Scatters in the air,
Monstrous murderer -- is my brain,
My flesh and my blood!"

Love and the Skull

(Old Tail-piece)

With bold and insolent grimace, 
Love laughingly bestrides 
The bare skull of the Human Race, 
And, as enthroned he rides, 
Blows bubbles from his rosy cheek 
Which soar into the sky 
As if, beyond the blue, to seek 
The other worlds on high. 
They ride with wondrous verve at first, 
Reflect the sunny beams, 
Then spit their flimsy souls, to burst 
And fade like golden dreams. 
I hear the skull at each renewal 
Expostulate aghast -- 
"This game, ridiculous and cruel -- 
When will it end at last? 
For what your cruel mouthpiece drains 
And scatters, sud by sud, 
Monstrous Assassin! is my brains, 
My substance, and my blood."

The Denial of Saint Peter

What does God do with the wave of curses 
That rises every day toward his dear Seraphim? 
Like a tyrant gorged with food and wine, he falls asleep 
To the sweet sound of our horrible blasphemies.

The sobs of martyrs and of tortured criminals 
Are doubtless an enchanting symphony, 
Since, despite the blood that this pleasure costs, 
The heavens have not yet been surfeited with it!

-- Ah Jesus, remember the Garden of Olives! 
In your naivete you prayed on your knees to 
Him Who in His heaven laughed at the sound of the nails 
Being driven into your living flesh;

When you saw them spitting on your divinity,
That vile mob of body-guards and scullions,
And when you felt the thorns go deep
Into your skull where lived immense Humanity,

When the horrible weight of your broken body
Lengthened your two outstretched arms, when your blood
And sweat flowed from your paling brow,
When you were placed before them all like a target,

Did you dream of those days so brilliant and so fair
When you came to fulfill the eternal promise,
When the gentle donkey you were riding trampled
The branches and flowers strewn in your path,

When, your heart swollen with courage and hope, 
You lashed those vile money-changers with all your might, 
In a word, when you were master? Did not remorse 
Penetrate your side deeper than the spear?

-- For my part, I shall indeed be content to leave 
A world where action is not the sister of dreams; 
Would that I could take up the sword and perish by the sword!
Saint Peter denied Jesus -- he did well!

The Denial of Saint Peter

What does God do with that huge storm of curses 
That rises daily to the seraphim? 
Like some gorged tyrant, while his guts he nurses, 
Our blasphemies are lullabies to him.

Martyrs and tortured victims with their cries 
Compose delicious symphonies, no doubt, 
Because, despite the blood they cost, the skies 
Can always do with more when they give out.

Jesus, remember, in the olive trees -- 
In all simplicity you prayed afresh 
To One whom your own butchers seemed to please 
In hammering the nails into your flesh.

To see your godhead spat on by the like 
Of scullions, and of troopers, and such scum, 
And feel the thorns into your temples strike 
Which held, of all Humanity, the sum:

To feel your body's horrifying weight 
Lengthen your arms, to feel the blood and sweat 
Itching your noble forehead pale with fate, 
And as a target to the world be set,

Then did you dream of brilliant days of song,
When, the eternal promise to fulfill,
You mounted on an ass and rode along,
Trampling the flowers and palms beneath your feet,

When whirling whips, and full of valiant force, 
The money-lenders quailed at your advance: 
When you, in short, were master? Did remorse 
Not pierce your body further than the lance?

I am quite satisfied to leave so bored
A world, where dream and action disunite.
I'd use the sword, to perish by the sword.
Peter denied his Master?... He did right!

Cain and Abel

I

Race of Abel, sleep, eat and drink; 
God smiles on you complacently.

Race of Cain, crawl on your belly, 
Die in the mire wretchedly.

Race of Abel, your sacrifice 
Delights the nose of the Seraphim!

Race of Cain, will there ever be 
An ending to your punishment?

Race of Abel, see your sowing 
And your cattle thrive and flourish;

Race of Cain, your bowels
Howl with hunger like an old dog.

Race of Abel, warm your belly 
At your patriarchal hearth;

Race of Cain, shiver with the cold 
In your cavern, wretched jackal!

Race of Abel, love, pullulate! 
Even your gold has progeny.

Race of Cain, with the burning heart, 
Beware of those intense desires.

Race of Abel, you browse and grow 
Like the insects of the forest!

Race of Cain, along the highways
Drag your destitute family.

II

Ah! race of Abel, your carcass 
Will fertilize the steaming soil!

Race of Cain, your appointed task 
Has not been adequately done;

Race of Abel, your disgrace is: 
The sword is conquered by the pike!

Race of Cain, ascend to heaven, 
And cast God down upon the earth!

Abel and Cain

I

Race of Abel! eat, sleep, drink. 
God smiles on those that he prefers. 
Race of Cain!in swamps that stink, 
Crawl, and die the death of curs. 
Race of Abel! your crops sprout, 
And your flocks are safe and sound. 
Race of Cain! your guts howl out 
In hunger, like an ancient hound. 
Race of Abel! warm your guts 
At the patriarchal fire. 
Race of Cain! in caves and huts 
Shiver like jackals in the mire. 
Race of Abel! Pullulate : 
Your gold too procreates its kind. 
Race of Cain! Hearts hot with hate, 
Leave all such appetites behind. 
Race of Abel! grow and graze, 
Like woodlice that on timbers prey. 
Race of Cain! along rough ways 
Lead forth your family at bay.

II

Ah! Race of Abel! your fat carrion 
Will well manure the soil it presses. 
Race of Cain! One task to carry on 
Remains for you, a task that presses. 
Race of Abel! Shame is nigh. 
The coulter's beaten by the sword. 
Race of Cain, climb up the sky, 
And to the earth hurl down the Lord.

Abel and Cain

I

Race of Abel, eat, sleep and drink;
God smiles on you approvingly.

Race of Cain, in filth and stink
Grovel and die, miserably.

Race of Abel, your offering
Flatters the angelic nose !

Race of Cain, what time will bring
The end of your torment and woes ?

Race of Abel, your seeds take root,
And see how all your cattle prosper;

Race of Cain, within your gut
Howls hunger like an ancient cur.

Race of Abel, your innards take
Warmth from the patriarchal hearth;

Race of Cain, poor jackal, shake
With cold, crouched in the hollowed earth !

Race of Abel, make love and spawn !
Your gold spawns also in its right.

Race of Cain, you hearts that burn,
Beware of such great appetite.

Race of Abel, you browse and breed
As wanton as an orchard pest.

Race of Cain, along the roadside
Drag your family, hard pressed.

II

Ah ! race of Abel, your fat carcass
Will enrich the reeking soil !

Race of Cain, your hard work is
Not finished yet in spite of all;

Race of Abel, here your shame lies :
The sword lost to the hunter’s rod !

Race of Cain, mount to the skies
And down upon the earth cast God !

Abel and Cain

I

Tribe of Abel, sleep, drink and eat, for God gives you his indulgent smile.
Tribe of Cain, crawl in the shit, die like a dog.
Tribe of Abel, how sweet your offerings smell in the nostrils of the Seraphim.
Tribe of Cain, will your agony never end?
Tribe of Abel, see how your seed prospers, how your cattle thrive.
Tribe of Cain, your guts howl with hunger like an old cur.
Tribe of Abel, warm your belly before the patriarch's hearth.
Tribe of Cain, tremble with cold in your hole in the ground, you miserable jackal.
Tribe of Abel, be amorous and increase: your gold also will multiply.
Tribe of Cain, however much your heart might burn with love, beware of all great desires.
Tribe of Abel, bloat and guzzle like woodlice.
Tribe of Cain, drag your hounded wife and children with you down the roads.

II

Tribe of Abel, one day your carcass will manure the fetid soil.
Tribe of Cain, your task is not yet done.
Tribe of Abel, your shame will come when the sword is shattered by the peasants' stake.
Tribe of Cain, ascend to heaven, and throw God down to earth.

The Litany of Satan

O you, the wisest and fairest of the Angels,
God betrayed by destiny and deprived of praise,

O Satan, take pity on my long misery!

O Prince of Exile, you who have been wronged
And who vanquished always rise up again more strong,

O Satan, take pity on my long misery!

You who know all, great king of hidden things,
The familiar healer of human sufferings,

O Satan, take pity on my long misery!

You who teach through love the taste for Heaven
To the cursed pariah, even to the leper,

O Satan, take pity on my long misery!

You who of Death, your mistress old and strong,
Have begotten Hope, -- a charming madcap!

O Satan, take pity on my long misery!

You who give the outlaw that calm and haughty look 
That damns the whole multitude around his scaffold.

O Satan, take pity on my long misery!

You who know in what nooks of the miserly earth
A jealous God has hidden precious stones,

O Satan, take pity on my long misery!

You whose clear eye sees the deep arsenals
Where the tribe of metals sleeps in its tomb,

O Satan, take pity on my long misery!

You whose broad hand conceals the precipice
From the sleep-walker wandering on the building's ledge,

O Satan, take pity on my long misery!

You who soften magically the old bones
Of belated drunkards trampled by the horses,

O Satan, take pity on my long misery!

You who to console frail mankind in its sufferings
Taught us to mix sulphur and saltpeter,

O Satan, take pity on my long misery!

You who put your mark, O subtle accomplice,
Upon the brow of Croesus, base and pitiless,

O Satan, take pity on my long misery!

You who put in the eyes and hearts of prostitutes
The cult of sores and the love of rags and tatters,

O Satan, take pity on my long misery!

Staff of those in exile, lamp of the inventor,
Confessor of the hanged and of conspirators,

O Satan, take pity on my long misery!

Adopted father of those whom in black rage
-- God the Father drove from the earthly paradise,

O Satan, take pity on my long misery!

Prayer

Glory and praise to you, O Satan, in the heights
Of Heaven where you reigned and in the depths
Of Hell where vanquished you dream in silence!
Grant that my soul may someday repose near to you
Under the Tree of Knowledge, when, over your brow,
Its branches will spread like a new Temple!

Litanies of Satan

Wisest of Angels, whom your fate betrays,
And, fairest of them all, deprives of praise,

Satan have pity on my long despair!

O Prince of exiles, who have suffered wrong,
Yet, vanquished, rise from every fall more strong,

Satan have pity on my long despair!

All-knowing lord of subterranean things,
Who remedy our human sufferings,

Satan have pity on my long despair!

To lepers and lost beggars full of lice, 
You teach, through love, the taste of Paradise.

Satan have pity on my long despair!

You who on Death, your old and sturdy wife,
Engendered Hope -- sweet folly of this life -- 

Satan have pity on my long despair!

You give to the doomed man that calm, unbaffled 
Gaze that rebukes the mob around the scaffold,

Satan have pity on my long despair!

You know in what closed corners of the earth 
A jealous God has hidden gems of worth.

Satan have pity on my long despair!

You know the deepest arsenals, where slumber 
The breeds of buried metals without number.

Satan have pity on my long despair!

You whose huge hand has hidden the abyss
From sleepwalkers that skirt the precipice,

Satan have pity on my long despair!

You who give suppleness to drunkards' bones
When trampled down by horses on the stones,

Satan have pity on my long despair!

You who, to make his sufferings the lighter,
Taught man to mix the sulphur with the nitre,

Satan have pity on my long despair!

You fix your mask, accomplice full of guile, 
On rich men's foreheads, pitiless and vile.

Satan have pity on my long despair!

You who fill the hearts and eyes of whores
With love of trifles and the cult of sores,

Satan have pity on my long despair!

The exile's staff, inventor's lamp, caresser
Of hanged men, and of plotters the confessor,

Satan have pity on my long despair!

Step-father of all those who, robbed of pardon,
God drove in anger out of Eden's garden

Satan have pity on my long despair!

Prayer

Praise to you, Satan! in the heights you lit, 
And also in the deeps where now you sit,
Vanquished, in Hell, and dream in hushed defiance 
O that my soul, beneath the Tree of Science
Might rest near you, while shadowing your brows, 
It spreads a second Temple with its boughs.

Litany to Satan

O grandest of the Angels, and most wise,
O fallen God, fate-driven from the skies,

Satan, at last take pity on our pain.

O first of exiles who endurest wrong,
Yet growest, in thy hatred, still more strong,

Satan, at last take pity on our pain!

O subterranean King, omniscient,
Healer of man's immortal discontent,

Satan, at last take pity on our pain.

To lepers and to outcasts thou dost show
That Passion is the Paradise below.

Satan, at last take pity on our pain.

Thou, by thy mistress Death, hast given to man
Hope, the imperishable courtesan.

Satan, at last take pity on our pain.

Thou givest to the Guilty their calm mien
Which damns the crowd around the guillotine.

Satan, at last take pity on our pain.

Thou knowest the corners of the jealous Earth
Where God has hidden jewels of great worth.

Satan, at last take pity on our pain.

Thou stretchest forth a saving hand to keep
Such men as roam upon the roofs in sleep.

Satan, at last take pity on our pain.

Thy power can make the halting Drunkard's feet
Avoid the peril of the surging street.

Satan, at last take pity on our pain.

Thou, to console our helplessness, didst plot
The cunning use of powder and of shot.

Satan, at last take pity on our pain.

Thy awful name is written as with pitch
On the unrelenting foreheads of the rich.

Satan, at last take pity on our pain.

In strange and hidden places thou dost move
Where women cry for torture in their love.

Satan, at last take pity on our pain.

Father of those whom God's tempestuous ire
Has flung from Paradise with sword and fire,

Satan, at last take pity on our pain.

PRAYER

Satan, to thee be praise upon the Height
Where thou wast king of old, and in the night
Of Hell, where thou dost dream on silently.
Grant that one day beneath the Knowledge-tree,
When it shoots forth to grace thy royal brow,
My soul may sit, that cries upon thee now.

The Litanies of Satan

O thou, of all the Angels loveliest and most learned,
To whom no praise is chanted and no incense burned,

Satan, have pity upon me in my deep distress!

O Prince of exile, god betrayed by foulest wrong,
Thou that in vain art vanquished, rising up more strong,

Satan, have pity upon me in my deep distress!

O thou who knowest all, each weak and shameful thing,
Kind minister to man in anguish, mighty king,

Satan, have pity upon me in my deep distress!

Thou that dost teach the leper, the pariah we despise,
To love like other men, and taste sweet Paradise,

Satan, have pity upon me in my deep distress!

O thou, that in the womb of Death, thy fecund mate,
Engenderest Hope, with her sweet eyes and her mad gait,

Satan, have pity upon me in my deep distress!

Thou who upon the scaffold dost give that calm and proud
Demeanor to the felon, which condemns the crowd,

Satan, have pity upon me in my deep distress!

Thou that hast seen in darkness and canst bring to light
The gems a jealous God has hidden from our sight,

Satan, have pity upon me in my deep distress!

Thou to whom all the secret arsenals are known
Where iron, where gold and silver, slumber, locked in stone,

Satan, have pity upon me in my deep distress!

Thou whose broad hand dost hide the precipice from him
Who, barefoot, in his sleep, walks on the building's rim,

Satan, have pity upon me in my deep distress!

O thou who makest supple between the horses' feet
The old bones of the drunkard fallen in the street,

Satan, have pity upon me in my deep distress!

Thou who best taught the frail and over-burdened mind
How easily saltpeter and sulphur are combined,

Satan, have pity upon me in my deep distress!

Thou that hast burned thy brand beyond all help secure,
Into the rich man's brow, who tramples on the poor,

Satan, have pity upon me in my deep distress!

O thou, who makest gentle the eyes and hearts of whores
With kindness for the wretched, homage for rags and sores,

Satan, have pity upon me in my deep distress!

Staff of the exile, lamp of the inventor, last
Priest of the man about whose neck the rope is passed,

Satan, have pity upon me in my deep distress!

O thou, adopted father of those fatherless
Whom God from Eden thrust in terror and nakedness,

Satan, have pity upon me in my deep distress!

Prayer

Glory and praise to thee, Satan, in the most high,
Where thou didst reign; and in deep hell's obscurity,
Where, manacled, thou broodest long! O silent power,
Grant that my soul be near to thee in thy great hour,
When, like a living Temple, victorious bough on bough,
Shall rise the Tree of Knowledge, whose roots are in thy brow!

Les Litanies de Satan

wisest and fairest of the Angels young,
o god whom fate betrayed and left unsung,

Satan, have pity on my long despair!

o exiled Prince borne down by many lies,
who, conquered, ever mightier dost arise,

Satan, have pity on my long despair!

o thou who knowest all things, who dost reign
in nether worlds, who healest all men's pain,

Satan, have pity on my long despair!

thou who to pariahs and lepers dost
reveal, through love, the heaven they have lost,

Satan, have pity on my long despair!

thou who with Death, that old and mighty trull,
begot us Hope, so mad, so beautiful!

Satan, have pity on my long despair!

o thou who gives bandits, doomed to die,
the brows which damn a nation, standing nigh,

Satan, have pity on my long despair!

o though who knowest in what crabbed zones
of earth, God locked away the precious stones,

Satan, have pity on my long despair!

o thou who seest through the deep dark walls
where sleep the metals' buried arsenals,

Satan, have pity on my long despair!

o thou whose hands upon the housetop keep
the abysses veiled from those who walk in sleep,

Satan, have pity on my long despair!

o thou who savest from the horses' feet
the poor old drunkard fallen in the street,

Satan, have pity on my long despair!

o thou who showest suffering mortals how
to mix the salts and sulphur -- blessed thou

Satan, have pity on my long despair!

thou who dost brand in subtle friendliness
the brows of rich men base and merciless,

Satan, have pity on my long despair!

o thou who hussies' eyes and bosoms chill
with lust of blood and love of rags dost fill,

Satan, have pity on my long despair!

staff of the exiled, torch inventors woo,
confessor of the gallows' plotting crew,

Satan, have pity on my long despair!

o foster-father of us all, who share
God's primal curse, and lost our Eden there,

Satan, have pity on my long despair!

glory and praise to the, in heaven above
where thou didst reign, and in the abysses of
thy Hell, where thou art brooding, silently!
grant that with thee my soul, beneath the Tree
of Knowledge may find rest, when, o'er thy brows, 
like a new Temple it puts forth its boughs!

The Soul of Wine

One night, the soul of wine was singing in the flask: 
"O man, dear disinherited! to you I sing 
This song full of light and of brotherhood 
From my prison of glass with its scarlet wax seals.

I know the cost in pain, in sweat,
And in burning sunlight on the blazing hillside,
Of creating my life, of giving me a soul:
I shall not be ungrateful or malevolent,

For I feel a boundless joy when I flow 
Down the throat of a man worn out by his labor; 
His warm breast is a pleasant tomb 
Where I'm much happier than in my cold cellar.

Do you hear the choruses resounding on Sunday 
And the hopes that warble in my fluttering breast? 
With sleeves rolled up, elbows on the table, 
You will glorify me and be content;

I shall light up the eyes of your enraptured wife, 
And give back to your son his strength and his color; 
I shall be for that frail athlete of life 
The oil that hardens a wrestler's muscles.

Vegetal ambrosia, precious grain scattered 
By the eternal Sower, I shall descend in you 
So that from our love there will be born poetry, 
Which will spring up toward God like a rare flower!"

The Soul of Wine

One night the wine was singing in the bottles: 
"Mankind, dear waif, I send to you, in spite 
Of prisoning glass and rosy wax that throttles, 
A song that's full of brotherhood and light.

I know what toil, and pain, and sweat you thole,
Under the roasting sun on slopes of fire,
To give me life and to beget my soul -- 
So I will not be thankless to my sire,

Because I feel a wondrous joy to dive 
Down, clown the throat of some work-wearied slave.
His warm chest is a tomb wherein I thrive 
Better than in my subterranean cave.

Say, can you hear that rousing catch resound 
Which hope within my beating heart sings high? 
(With elbows on the table, sprawl around, 
Contented hearts! my name to glorify.)

I'll light the eyes of your delighted wife.
Your son I'll give both rosy health and muscle
And be to that frail athlete of this life
Like oil that primes the wrestler for the tussle,

In you I fall, ambrosia from above, 
Sown by the hand of the eternal Power, 
That poetry may blossom from our love 
And rear to God its rare and deathless flower!"

The Soul of Wine

One eve in the bottle sang the soul of wine:
"Man, unto thee, dear disinherited,
I sing a song of love and light divine -- 
Prisoned in glass beneath my seals of red.

"I know thou labourest on the hill of fire,
In sweat and pain beneath a flaming sun,
To give the life and soul my vines desire,
And I am grateful for thy labours done.

"For I find joys unnumbered when I lave
The throat of man by travail long outworn,
And his hot bosom is a sweeter grave
Of sounder sleep than my cold caves forlorn.

"Hearest thou not the echoing Sabbath sound?
The hope that whispers in my trembling breast?
Thy elbows on the table! gaze around;
Glorify me with joy and be at rest.

"To thy wife's eyes I'll bring their long-lost gleam,
I'll bring back to thy child his strength and light,
To him, life's fragile athlete I will seem
Rare oil that firms his muscles for the fight.

"I flow in man's heart as ambrosia flows;
The grain the eternal Sower casts in the sod -- 
From our first loves the first fair verse arose,
Flower-like aspiring to the heavens and God!"

The Rag-Picker's Wine

Often, in the red light of a street-lamp
Of which the wind whips the flame and worries the glass,
In the heart of some old suburb, muddy labyrinth,
Where humanity crawls in a seething ferment,

One sees a rag-picker go by, shaking his head, 
Stumbling, bumping against the walls like a poet, 
And, with no thought of the stool-pigeons, his subjects, 
He pours out his whole heart in grandiose projects.

He takes oaths, dictates sublime laws, 
Lays low the wicked and succors victims; 
Beneath the firmament spread like a canopy 
He gets drunk with the splendor of his own virtues.

Yes, these people harassed by domestic worries,
Ground down by their work, distorted by age,
Worn-out, and bending beneath a load of debris,
The commingled vomit of enormous Paris,

Come back, smelling of the wine-cask,
Followed by companions whitened by their battles,
And whose moustaches bang down like old flags;
Banners, flowers, and triumphal arches

Rise up before them, a solemn magic! 
And in the deafening, brilliant orgy 
Of clarions and drums, of sunlight and of shouts, 
They bring glory to the crowd drunk with love!

It is thus that throughout frivolous Humanity 
Wine, the dazzling Pactolus, carries flakes of gold; 
By the throats of men he sings his exploits 
And reigns by his gifts like a veritable king.

To drown the bitterness and lull the indolence
Of all these accurst old men who die in silence,
God, touched with remorse, had created sleep;
Man added Wine, divine child of the Sun!

The Wine of the Rag Pickers

Often, in some red street-lamp's glare, whose flame
The wind flaps, rattling at its glassy frame,
In the mired labyrinth of some old slum
Where crawling multitudes ferment their scum -- 

With judge-like nods, a rag-picker comes reeling,
Bumping on walls, like poets, without feeling,
And scorning cops, now vassals of his state,
Begins on glorious subjects to dilate,

Takes royal oaths, dictates his laws sublime, 
Exalts the injured, and chastises crime, 
And, spreading his own dais on the sky, 
Is dazzled by his virtues, starred on high.

Yes, these folk, badgered by domestic care,
Ground down by toil, decrepitude, despair,
Buckled beneath the foul load that each carries,
The motley vomit of enormous Paris -- 

Come home, vat-scented, trailing clouds of glory,
Followed by veteran comrades, battle-hoary,
Whose whiskers stream like banners as each marches.
-- Flags, torches, flowers, and steep triumphal arches

Rise up for them in magic hues and burn,
Since through this dazzling orgy they return,
While drums and clarions daze the sun above,
With glory to a nation drunk with love!

Thus Wine, through giddy human life, is rolled, 
Like Pactolus, a stream of burning gold; 
Through man's own throat his exploits it will sing 
And reign by gifts, as best befits a king.

To lull their laziness and drown their rancour, 
For storm-tossed wrecks a temporary anchor, 
God, in remorse, made sleep. Man added Wine, 
Child of the Sun, immortal and divine!

The Murderer's Wine

My wife is dead and I am free! 
Now I can drink my fill; 
When I'd come home without a sou, 
Her screaming would drive me crazy.

I am as happy as a king;
The air is pure, the sky superb...
We had a summer like this
When I fell in love with her!

To satisfy the awful thirst 
That tortures me, I'd have to drink 
All the wine it would take to fill 
Her grave -- that is not a little:

I threw her down a well,
And what is more, I dropped on her
All the stones of the well's rim.
I will forget her if I can!

In the name of love's vows,
From which nothing can release us,
And to become the friends we were
When we first knew passion's rapture,

I begged of her a rendezvous 
At night, on a deserted road. 
She came there! -- mad creature! 
We're all more or less mad!

She was still attractive,
Although very tired! and I,
I loved her too much! that is why
I said to her: Depart this life!

None can understand me. Did one 
Among all those stupid drunkards 
Ever dream in his morbid nights 
Of making a shroud of wine?

That dissolute crowd, unfeeling
As an iron machine,
Never, nor summer, nor winter,
Has known what true love is,

With its black enchantments,
Its hellish cortege of alarms,
Its phials of poison, and its tears,
Its noise of chains and dead men's bones!

-- Here I am free and all alone!
I'll get blind drunk tonight;
Then without fear, without remorse,
I'll lie down on the ground

And I'll sleep like a dog!
The dump-cart with its heavy wheels
Loaded with mud and rocks,
The careening wagon may well

Crush in my guilty head 
Or cut my body in two; 
I laugh at God, at the Devil, 
And at the Holy Table as well!

The Wine of the Murderer

My wife is dead. I'm free. From hence 
I'll drink my fill, and that's the truth! 
Each time I came back with no pence, 
Her screechings drilled me like a tooth.

Now I'm as happy as a king...
Air pure, a cloudless sky above. 
I can remember such a thing 
The summer that we fell in love.

To quench the thirst that tears my throat
It would require the vats to flow
Enough to set her tomb afloat -- 
And that's no thimbleful, oh no!

I threw her in a well to drown, 
With the walled rocks that round it stood, 
To keep her there, and hold her down -- 
I would forget her if I could!

Pleading our early tender vows,
Which naught could break for evermore,
To reconcile us, spouse to spouse,
In the same raptures as before -- 

I begged of her a rendezvous
One evening in a gloomy lane.
She came -- a crazy thing to do!
We all are more-or-less insane!

She still was quite attractive, though 
A little tired and ill: and I 
Still loved her more than ever: so 
I said, "Get out of life, and die!"

None understand me. Could a single 
"Drunk" of the stupid sort design, 
On morbid nights, by his own ingle, 
To make a winding sheet of wine?

Of dense invulnerable stuff,
Like engines built to shunt or shove,
They've never known, through smooth or rough,
The veritable power of love,

its black enchantments, fiery trials, 
Processions of infernal pains, 
Its burning tears, its poison phials, 
Its rattling bones, and jingling chains.

Now I am free and all alone. 
Tonight I'll get dead-drunk, of course. 
My head I'll pillow on a stone 
Without repentance or remorse.

And there I'll sleep like any dog.
The lumbering cart with massive wheels
Piled up with stones, or peat, or bog,
Or hurtling wagon, as it reels

May crush my skull in, like a clod, 
Or halve me at the crossing-level. 
I'd care as little as for God, 
The Ten Commandments, or the Devil.

The Drunkard

My wife is dead, and I am free!
Now I can drink both night and day. 
When I came home without my pay 
Her crying upset me horribly.

I am as happy as a king. 
The air is soft. The sky is clear. 
Ah, what a lovely spring, this year! 
I courted her in such a spring.

Now I can drink to drown my care
As much wine as her tomb would hold -- 
The tomb where she lies pale and cold.
And that will be no small affair,

For I have thrown her, body and limb,
In an old well; I even threw
All the loose stones around the brim
On top of her. Good riddance, too!

I asked her in the name of Christ,
To whom our marriage vows were told,
To be my sweetheart as of old -- 
To come to a forsaken tryst

We had when we were young and gay, 
That everything might be the same: 
And she, the foolish creature, came! 
We all have our weak moments, eh?

She was attractive still, all right,
Though faded. I still loved her -- more
Than there was rhyme or reason for.
I had to end it, come what might!

Nobody understands me. What's 
The use of wasting my good breath 
Explaining to these stupid sots 
The mysteries of love and death?

They take their women by routine, 
These louts -- the way they eat and drink. 
Which one has ever stopped to think 
What the word love might really mean?

Love, with its softness in your reins, 
With all its nightmares, all its fears, 
Its cups of poison mixed with tears, 
Its rattling skeletons and chains.

-- Well, here I am, alone and free!
Tonight I will be drunk for fair,
And I will lay me down, I swear,
Upon the highroad happily,

And sleep like an old dog, be sure,
Right where the heavy trucks go by,
Loaded with gravel and manure.
The wheel can smear my brains out -- ay,

Or it can break me like a clod 
In two, or it can mash me flat. 
I care about as much for that 
As for the long white beard of God!

The Murderer's Wine

My wife is dead and I am free, 
Now I may drink to my content; 
When I came back without a cent 
Her piteous outcries tortured me. 

Now I am happy as a king, 
The air is pure, the sky is clear; 
Just such a summer as that year, 
When first I went a-sweethearting. 

A horrible thirst is tearing me, 
To quench it I should have to swill 
Just as much cool wine as would fill 
Her tomb -- that's no small quantity. 

I threw her down and then began 
To pile upon her where she fell 
All the great stones around the well -- 
I shall forget it if I can. 

By all the soft vows of our prime, 
By those eternal oaths we swore, 
And that our love might be once more 
As 'twas in our old passionate time, 

I begged her in a lonely spot 
To come and meet me at nightfall; 
She came, mad creature -- we are all 
More or less crazy, are we not? 

She was quite pretty still, my wife, 
Though she was very tired, and I, 
I loved her too much, that is why 
I said to her, "Come, quit this life."

No one can grasp my thought aright; 
Did any of these sodden swine 
Ever conceive a shroud of wine 
On his most strangely morbid night? 

Dull and insensible above 
Iron machines, that stupid crew, 
Summer or winter, never knew 
The agonies of real love. 

So now I am without a care! 
Dead-drunk this evening I shall be, 
Then fearlessly, remorselessly 
Shall lie out in the open air. 

And sleep there like a homeless cur; 
Some cart may rumble with a load 
Of stones or mud along the road 
And crush my head -- I shall not stir. 

Some heavy dray incontinent 
May come and cut me clean in two: 
I laugh at thought o't as I do 
At Devil, God, and Sacrament. 

The Wine of the Solitary

The strange look of a lady of pleasure 
Turned slyly toward us like the white beam 
Which the undulous moon casts on the trembling lake 
When she wishes to bathe her nonchalant beauty;

The last bag of crowns between a gambler's fingers;
A lustful kiss from slender Adeline;
The sound of music, tormenting and caressing,
Resembling the distant cry of a man in pain,

All that is not worth, O deep, deep bottle, 
The penetrating balm that your fruitful belly 
Holds for the thirsty heart of the pious poet;

You pour out for him hope, and youth, and life
-- And pride, the treasure of all beggary,
Which makes us triumphant and equal to the gods!

The Wine of the Solitary Man

The love-glance of a courtesan that swims 
With undulating ray like that the moon 
Sends to the waiting, tremulous lagoon 
Where she's about to lave her languid limbs:

The last few florins in a gambler's fingers: 
The lustful kiss of slender Adeline: 
A haunting tune that wheedles and malingers, 
Wherein all human anguish seems to pine:

All these aren't worth, O bottle kind and deep, 
The penetrating balms that swell your paunch 
The pious poet's wounded heart to staunch.

You pour him hope, youth, life, and healing sleep -- 
And pride, all Beggary's diadem and treasure, 
By which our triumphs with the Gods' we measure.

Le Vin du solitaire

the wildering glances of a harlot fair
seen gliding toward us like the silver wake
of undulant moonlight on the quivering lake
when Phoebe bathes her languorous beauty there;

the last gold coins a gambler's fingers hold;
the wanton kiss of love-worn Adeline,
the wheedling songs that leave the will supine
-- like far-off cries of sorrow unconsoled --

all these, o bottle deep, were never worth 
the pungent balsams in thy fertile girth
stored for the pious poet's thirsty heart;

thou pourest hope and youth and strength anew,
-- and pride, this treasure of the beggar-crew, 
that lifts us like triumphant gods, apart!

The Wine of Lovers

Today space is magnificent! 
Without bridle or bit or spurs 
Let us ride away on wine 
To a divine, fairy-like heaven!

Like two angels who are tortured 
By a relentless delirium, 
Let us follow the far mirage 
Through the crystal blue of the morning!

Gently balanced upon the wings
Of the intelligent whirlwind,
In a similar ecstasy,

My sister, floating side by side, 
We'll flee without ever stopping 
To the paradise of my dreams!

The Wine of Lovers

Oh, what a splendour fills all space!
Without bit, spur, or rein to race, 
Let's gallop on the steeds of wine 
To heavens magic and divine!

Now like two angels off the track, 
Whom wild relentless fevers rack, 
On through the morning's crystal blue 
The swift mirages we'll pursue.

Now softly poised upon the wings 
That a sagacious cyclone brings, 
In parallel delirium twinned,

While side by side we surf the wind, 
We'll never cease from such extremes, 
To seek the Eden of our dreams!

The Wine of Lovers

To-day the Distance is superb, 
Without bridle, spur or curb, 
Let us mount on the back of wine 
For Regions fairy and divine! 

Let's, like two angels tortured by 
Some dark, delirious phantasy, 
Pursue the distant mirage drawn 
O'er the blue crystal of the dawn! 

And gently balanced on the wing 
Of some obliging whirlwind, we 
-- In equal rapture revelling --

My sister, side by side will flee, 
Without repose, nor truce, where gleams 
The golden Paradise of my dreams! 

The Wine of Lovers

Space rolls to-day her splendour round!
Unbridled, spurless, without bound,
Mount we upon the wings of wine
For skies fantastic and divine!

Let us, like angels tortured by
Some wild delirious phantasy,
Follow the far-off mirage born
In the blue crystal of the morn.

And gently balanced on the wing
Of the wild whirlwind we will, ride,
Rejoicing with the joyous thing.

My sister, floating side by side,
Fly we unceasing whither gleams
The distant heaven of my dreams.

The Death of Lovers

We shall have beds full of subtle perfumes, 
Divans as deep as graves, and on the shelves 
Will be strange flowers that blossomed for us 
Under more beautiful heavens.

Using their dying flames emulously, 
Our two hearts will be two immense torches 
Which will reflect their double light 
In our two souls, those twin mirrors.

Some evening made of rose and of mystical blue 
A single flash will pass between us 
Like a long sob, charged with farewells;

And later an Angel, setting the doors ajar,
Faithful and joyous, will come to revive
The tarnished mirrors, the extinguished flames.

The Death of Lovers

We shall have beds round which light scents are wafted,
Divans which are as deep and wide as tombs; 
Strange flowers that under brighter skies were grafted 
Will scent our shelves with rare exotic blooms.

When, burning to the last their mortal ardour, 
Our torch-like hearts their bannered flames unroll, 
Their double light will kindle all the harder 
Within the deep, twinned mirror of our soul.

One evening made of mystic rose and blue, 
I will exchange a lightning-flash with you, 
Like a long sob that bids a last adieu.

Later, the Angel, opening the door 
Faithful and happy, will at last renew 
Dulled mirrors, and the flames that leap no more.

The Death of the Lovers

We will have beds which exhale odours soft, 
We will have divans profound as the tomb, 
And delicate plants on the ledges aloft, 
Which under the bluest of skies for us bloom. 

Exhausting our hearts to their last desires, 
They both shall be like unto two glowing coals, 
Reflecting the twofold light of their fires 
Across the twin mirrors of our two souls. 

One evening of mystical azure skies, 
We'll exchange but one single lightning flash, 
Just like a long sob -- replete with good byes. 

And later an angel shall joyously pass 
Through the half-open doors, to replenish and wash 
The torches expired, and the tarnished glass. 

La Mort des amants

beds of subtle fragrance shall be ours,
soft divans far deeper than a tomb,
fairer climes shall yield mysterious flowers
-- flowers which for us were made to bloom.

lavishing our final amorous hours
there, our flaming hearts shall merge and loom
in the twin mirrors of these souls of ours
-- torches vast which side by side consume.

then some evening, rose and mystic blue,
charged with the sobbing woe of our adieu,
Love shall links us in one lightning-spark;

later, shall the faithful angel fling
all the portals wide, illumining
the flameless torches and the mirrors dark.

The Death of Lovers

There shall be couches whence faint odours rise,
Divans like sepulchres, deep and profound;
Strange flowers that bloomed beneath diviner skies
The death-bed of our love shall breathe around.

And guarding their last embers till the end,
Our hearts shall be the torches of the shrine,
And their two leaping flames shall fade and blend
In the twin mirrors of your soul and mine.

And through the eve of rose and mystic blue
A beam of love shall pass from me to you,
Like a long sigh charged with a last farewell;

And later still an angel, flinging wide
The gates, shall bring to life with joyful spell
The tarnished mirrors and the flames that died.

The Death of the Poor

It's Death that comforts us, alas! and makes us live; 
It is the goal of life; it is the only hope 
Which, like an elixir, makes us inebriate 
And gives us the courage to march until evening;

Through the storm and the snow and the hoar-frost 
It is the vibrant light on our black horizon; 
It is the famous inn inscribed upon the book, 
Where one can eat, and sleep, and take his rest;

It's an Angel who holds in his magnetic hands 
Sleep and the gift of ecstatic dreams 
And who makes the beds for the poor, naked people;

It's the glory of the gods, the mystic granary, 
It is the poor man's purse, his ancient fatherland, 
It is the portal opening on unknown Skies!

The Death of Paupers

It's Death comforts us, alas! and makes us live. 
It is the goal of life, it brings us hope, 
And, like a rich elixir, seems to give 
Courage to march along the darkening slope.

Across the tempest, hail, and hoarfrost, look!
Along the black horizon, a faint gleam!
It is the inn that's written in the book
Where one can sleep, and eat, and sit and dream.

An Angel, in magnetic hands it holds 
Sleep and the gift of sweet ecstatic dreams, 
And makes a bed for poor and naked souls.

It is God's glory and the mystic grange: 
The poor man's purse and fatherland it seems, 
And door that opens Heavens vast and strange.

The Death of the Poor

Death? Death is our one comfort! -- is the bread whereby 
We live, the wine that warms us when all hope is gone; 
The very goal of Life. That we shall one day die: 
This is the thought which gives us courage to go on.

Clear on the black horizon, through the blinding sleet, 
That beacon burns; -- oh, Death, thou inn of wide renown! 
Is it not written in the book: "Here all may eat; 
Here there is rest for all; here all may sit them down?"

Thou hovering Angel, holding in thy magic hand 
Slumber and blissful dreams; thou Glory overhead; 
Mysterious attic, filled with treasures manifold;

The poor man's purse, and his remembered fatherland; 
Thou, that remakest nightly the beggar's crumpled bed; 
Thou only door ajar, pledge of the peace foretold!

The Death of the Poor

It is Death that consoles -- yea, and causes our lives;
'Tis the goal of this Life and of Hope the sole ray, 
Which like a strong potion enlivens and gives 
Us the strength to plod on to the end of the day. 

And all through the tempest, the frost and the snows, 
'Tis the shimmering light on our black sky-line;
'Tis the famous inn which the guide-book shows, 
Whereat one can eat, and sleep, and recline;

'Tis an angel that holds in his magic hands 
The sleep, which ecstatic dream commands, 
Who remakes up the beds of the naked and poor;

'Tis the fame of the gods, 'tis the granary blest, 
'Tis the purse of the poor, and his birth-place of rest, 
To the unknown Heavens, 'tis the wide-open door. 

La Mort des pauvres

'tis Death that helps us live, 'tis Death consoles;
Death is life's goal; 'tis the one hope that cheers,
and, like a cordial, spurs our slackening souls,
bestowing strength to march till night appears;

through snow and hoar-frost, where the tempest rolls
toward the black hills, Death's leaping fire veers;
Death is the famous Inn the Book extols,
where we shall dine and rest among our peers;

Death is an angel, with his fingers full
of magic sleep and dreams most wonderful,
-- who smoothes the bed whereon the beggar lies;

Death is the glory of the gods, the gold
all poor folk hoard, their fatherland of old,
Death is the portal wide to unknown skies!

The Death of the Poor

Death is consoler and Death brings to life;
The end of all, the solitary hope;
We, drunk with Death's elixir, face the strife,
Take heart, and mount till eve the weary slope.

Across the storm, the hoar-frost, and the snow,
Death on our dark horizon pulses clear;
Death is the famous hostel we all know,
Where we may rest and sleep and have good cheer.

Death is an angel whose magnetic palms
Bring dreams of ecstasy and slumberous calms
To smooth the beds of naked men and poor.

Death is the mystic granary of God;
The poor man's purse; his fatherland of yore;
The Gate that opens into heavens untrod!

The Death of Artists

How many times must I shake my bauble and bells 
And kiss your low forehead, dismal caricature? 
To strike the target of mystic nature, 
How many javelins must I waste, O my quiver?

We shall wear out our souls in subtle schemes
And we shall demolish many an armature
Before contemplating the glorious Creature
For whom a tormenting desire makes our hearts grieve!

There are some who have never known their Idol
And those sculptors, damned and branded with shame,
Who are always hammering their brows and their breasts,

Have but one hope, bizarre and somber Capitol! 
It is that Death, soaring like a new sun, 
Will bring to bloom the flowers of their brains!

The Death of Artists

How often must I shake my bells, and kiss 
Your brow, sad Travesty? How many a dart, 
My quiver, shoot at Nature's mystic heart 
Before I hit the target that I miss?

We'll still consume our souls in subtle schemes, 
Demolishing tough harness, long before 
We see the giant Creature of our dreams 
Whom all the world is weeping to adore.

Some never knew their Idol, though they prayed:
And these doomed sculptors, with an insult branded,
Hammer your brows and bosom, heavy-handed,

In the one hope, O Capitol of shade! 
That Death like some new sun should rise and give 
Warmth to their wasted flowers, and make them live.

La Mort des artistes

how often must I shake my bells, and deign
to kiss thy brow debased, full travesty?
to pierce the mark, whose goal is mystery,
how oft, my quiver, waste thy darts in vain?

we shall exhaust our soul and subtle brain
and burst the bars of many a tyranny,
ere we shall glimpse the vast divinity
for which we burn and sob and burn again!

some too their idol never knew, and now,
flouted and branded with the brand of hell,
go beating fists of wrath on breast and brow;

one hope they know, strange, darkling citadel!
-- can Death's new sunlight, streaming o'er the tomb,
lure the dead flower of their brain to bloom?

The Albatross

Often, to amuse themselves, the men of a crew 
Catch albatrosses, those vast sea birds 
That indolently follow a ship 
As it glides over the deep, briny sea.

Scarcely have they placed them on the deck 
Than these kings of the sky, clumsy, ashamed, 
Pathetically let their great white wings 
Drag beside them like oars.

That winged voyager, how weak and gauche he is, 
So beautiful before, now comic and ugly! 
One man worries his beak with a stubby clay pipe; 
Another limps, mimics the cripple who once flew!

The poet resembles this prince of cloud and sky 
Who frequents the tempest and laughs at the bowman; 
When exiled on the earth, the butt of hoots and jeers, 
His giant wings prevent him from walking.

The Albatross

Sometimes for sport the men of loafing crews 
Snare the great albatrosses of the deep, 
The indolent companions of their cruise 
As through the bitter vastitudes they sweep.

Scarce have they fished aboard these airy kings 
When helpless on such unaccustomed floors, 
They piteously droop their huge white wings 
And trail them at their sides like drifting oars.

How comical, how ugly, and how meek 
Appears this soarer of celestial snows! 
One, with his pipe, teases the golden beak, 
One, limping, mocks the cripple as he goes.

The Poet, like this monarch of the clouds, 
Despising archers, rides the storm elate. 
But, stranded on the earth to jeering crowds, 
The great wings of the giant baulk his gait.

The Albatross

Sometimes, to entertain themselves, the men of the crew 
Lure upon deck an unlucky albatross, one of those vast 
Birds of the sea that follow unwearied the voyage through, 
Flying in slow and elegant circles above the mast.

No sooner have they disentangled him from their nets 
Than this aerial colossus, shorn of his pride, 
Goes hobbling pitiably across the planks and lets 
His great wings hang like heavy, useless oars at his side.

How droll is the poor floundering creature, how limp and weak -- 
He, but a moment past so lordly, flying in state! 
They tease him: One of them tries to stick a pipe in his beak; 
Another mimics with laughter his odd lurching gait.

The Poet is like that wild inheritor of the cloud, 
A rider of storms, above the range of arrows and slings; 
Exiled on earth, at bay amid the jeering crowd, 
He cannot walk for his unmanageable wings.

The Albatross

Often, as an amusement, crewmen
Catch albatrosses, huge birds of the sea,
Who follow, indolent companions of the voyage,
The ship gliding over the salty deeps.

As soon as they have placed them on the deck,
These kings of the sky, awkward and ashamed,
Pitiably let their large white wings
Drag at their sides like oars.

This winged voyager, how gauche and weak he is!
Once so handsome, how comic and ugly he is!
One sailor irritates his beak with a pipestem,
Another mimes, as he limps, the invalid who once flew!

The Poet is like the prince of the clouds,
Who haunts the tempest and mocks the archer;
Exiled on the earth in the midst of derision,
His giant wings keep him from walking.

Albatrosses

Often our sailors, for an hour of fun,
Catch albatrosses on the after breeze
Through which these trail the ship from sun to sun
As it skims down the deep and briny seas.

Scarce have these birds been set upon the poop,
Than, awkward now, they, the sky's emperors,
Piteous and shamed, let their great white wings droop
Beside them like a pair of idle oars.

These winged voyagers, how gauche their gait!
Once noble, now how ludicrous to view!
One sailor bums them with his pipe, his mate
Limps, mimicking these cripples who once flew.

Poets are like these lords of sky and cloud,
Who ride the storm and mock the bow's taut strings,
Exiled on earth amid a jeering crowd,
Prisoned and palsied by their giant wings.

The Albatross

Often, to amuse themselves, the men of the crew 
Catch those great birds of the seas, the albatrosses, 
lazy companions of the voyage, who follow 
The ship that slips through bitter gulfs.

Hardly have they put them on the deck, 
Than these kings of the skies, awkward and ashamed, 
Piteously let their great white wings 
Draggle like oars beside them.

This winged traveler, how weak he becomes and slack! 
He who of late was so beautiful, how comical and ugly! 
Someone teases his beak with a branding iron, 
Another mimics, limping, the crippled flyer!

The Poet is like the prince of the clouds, 
Haunting the tempest and laughing at the archer; 
Exiled on earth amongst the shouting people, 
His giant's wings hinder him from walking.

The Mask

Allegorical Statue in the Style of the Renaissance
To Ernest Christophe, Sculptor

Let us gaze at this gem of Florentine beauty; 
In the undulation of this brawny body 
Those divine sisters, Gracefulness and Strength, abound. 
This woman, a truly miraculous marble, 
Adorably slender, divinely robust, 
Is made to be enthroned upon sumptuous beds 
And to charm the leisure of a Pope or a Prince.

-- And see that smile, voluptuous and delicate, 
Where self-conceit displays its ecstasy; 
That sly, lingering look, mocking and languorous; 
That dainty face, framed in a veil of gauze, 
Whose every feature says, with a triumphant air: 
"Pleasure calls me and Love gives me a crown!" 
To that being endowed with so much majesty 
See what exciting charm is lent by prettiness!
Let us draw near, and walk around its loveliness.

O blasphemy of art! Fatal surprise! 
That exquisite body, that promise of delight, 
At the top turns into a two-headed monster!

Why no! it's but a mask, a lying ornament, 
That visage enlivened by a dainty grimace, 
And look, here is, atrociously shriveled, 
The real, true head, the sincere countenance 
Reversed and hidden by the lying face. 
Poor glamorous beauty! the magnificent stream 
Of your tears flows into my anguished heart; 
Your falsehood makes me drunk and my soul slakes its thirst 
At the flood from your eyes, which Suffering causes!

-- But why is she weeping? She, the perfect beauty, 
Who could put at her feet the conquered human race, 
What secret malady gnaws at those sturdy flanks?

-- She is weeping, fool, because she has lived!
And because she lives! But what she deplores
Most, what makes her shudder down to her knees,
Is that tomorrow, alas! she will still have to live!
Tomorrow, after tomorrow, always! -- like us!

The Mask

(An allegoric statue in Renaissance style)

To Ernest Christophe, sculptor

Study with me this Florentinian treasure, 
Whose undulous and muscular design 
Welds Grace with Strength in sisterhood divine; 
A marvel only wonderment can measure, 
Divinely strong, superbly slim and fine, 
She's formed to reign upon a bed of pleasure 
And charm some prince or pontiff in his leisure.

See, too, her smile voluptuously shine, 
Where sheer frivolity displays its sign: 
That lingering look of languor, guile, and cheek, 
The dainty face, which veils of gauze enshrine, 
That seems in conquering accents thus to speak:

"Pleasure commands me. Love my brow has crowned!' 
Enamouring our thoughts in humble duty, 
True majesty with merriment is found. 
Approach, let's take a turn about her beauty. 
O blasphemy! Dread shock! Our hopes to pique, 
This lovely body, promising delight, 
Ends at the top in a two-headed freak.

But no! it's just a mask that tricked our sight, 
Fooling us with that exquisite grimace: 
On the reverse you see her proper face, 
Fiercely convulsed, in its true self revealed, 
Which from our sight that lying mask concealed.
-- O sad great beauty! The grand river, fed 
By your rich tears, debouches in my heart. 
Though I am rapt with your deceptive art,
My soul is slaked upon the tears you shed.

And yet why does she weep? Such peerless grace 
Could trample down the conquered human race. 
What evil gnaws her flank so strong and sleek?

She weeps because she's lived, and that she lives. 
Madly she weeps for that. But more she grieves 
(And at the knees she trembles and goes weak) 
Because tomorrow she must live, and then 
The next day, and forever -- like us men.

The Mask

An Allegorical Statue in Renaissance Style

Behold this prize of beauties wholly Florentine,
See in this muscled body, lithe and sinuous,
Divine concinnity married to strength divine.
This woman sculpted by hands that wrought, miraculous.
So strangely strong, and so strangely slim in scope,
She was born to throne on beds made rich and sumptuous
To charm the happy leisure of a Prince or Pope.

Behold these smiling lips, suave and voluptuous,
Whose ecstasies of arrant self-love give us pause;
The mocking pawkishness of that long languid stare,
Those dainty features framed in luminous light gauze,
Whose every facet says with an all-conquering air:
"Lo, Pleasure calls and Love crowns my triumphant head!"
On this proud creature vested with such stateliness,
See what exciting charms her daintiness has shed.
Let us draw close and walk around her. O excess,
O blasphemy of Art! O treachery unique!
That body filled with promise, rapturous and rare,
Turns at the top into a double-headed freak!

No, this is but a mask, a decorative snare,
Poor visage lighted by a delicate grimace!
And look! contracted here, in raw and hideous troubles,
The genuine head and the authentic, candid face
Are overturned and darkened by their lying doubles.
Poor noble beauty, the magnificent broad river
Of your sad tears flows through my heart; your lie of lies
Intoxicates me, and my thirsty soul aquiver
Is slaked by the salt flood Pain dredges from your eyes.

But why is it she weeps, whose loveliness outranks
All others, and who binds all humans by her laws?
What hushed mysterious ill gnaws at her athlete flanks?
She weeps because, O madman, she has lived, because
She must live on. But her most pitiful misgiving -- 
What chills her very knees and turns her tremulous -- 
Is that alas! tomorrow she must go on living -- 
Tomorrow and tomorrow -- evermore -- like us!

The Mask

<i>An Allegorical Statue in the Style of the Renaissance</i>

<i>To Ernest Christophe, sculptor</i>

Observe the Florentine grand style, and trace
How in this body's sinuous soft curves
Twin goddesses are present, Force and Grace;
Truly she is miraculous, deserves
In her delicious strength and suppleness
To be enthroned on some most sumptuous bed
And charm a king's or pontiff's idleness.

Observe again where self-conceit is led
To steal enjoyment from this tempting smile;
This languid, sinister and mocking air;
This coy regard, concealed beneath a veil,
In which victorious lineaments declare
"I am called Pleasure, and am crowned by Love."
What thrilling charm informs her majesty
This moving gentleness goes far to prove.
Let us go near and walk around her beauty.

Oh ! blasphemy of art! Oh ! fatal shock!
The divine body, which appeared to ask
Us to our pleasure, has two heads that mock!

No ! these exquisite features are a mask,
Mere debased ornament with fine grimace;
Behind, atrociously contorted, is
The veritable head, the sincere face
Turned to the shadow of this face which lies.
Poor perfect beauty, a grand river breaks
As your tears fall into my anxious soul,
I am drunk with your lie, my spirit slakes
Its torture in the stream your eyes unroll.

Why is she weeping ? In her lovely pride
She could have conquered the whole race of man;
What unknown evil harrows her lithe side?

She weeps, mad girl, because her life began;
Because she lives. One thing she does deplore
So much that she kneels trembling in the dust -- 
That she must live tomorrow, evermore,
Tomorrow and tomorrow -- as we must!

Hymn to Beauty

Do you come from Heaven or rise from the abyss, 
Beauty? Your gaze, divine and infernal, 
Pours out confusedly benevolence and crime, 
And one may for that, compare you to wine.

You contain in your eyes the sunset and the dawn; 
You scatter perfumes like a stormy night; 
Your kisses are a philtre, your mouth an amphora, 
Which make the hero weak and the child courageous.

Do you come from the stars or rise from the black pit? 
Destiny, bewitched, follows your skirts like a dog; 
You sow at random joy and disaster, 
And you govern all things but answer for nothing.

You walk upon corpses which you mock, O Beauty! 
Of your jewels Horror is not the least charming, 
And Murder, among your dearest trinkets, 
Dances amorously upon your proud belly.

The dazzled moth flies toward you, O candle!
Crepitates, flames and says: "Blessed be this flambeau!"
The panting lover bending o'er his fair one
Looks like a dying man caressing his own tomb,

Whether you come from heaven or from hell, who cares, 
O Beauty! Huge, fearful, ingenuous monster! 
If your regard, your smile, your foot, open for me 
An Infinite I love but have not ever known?

From God or Satan, who cares? Angel or Siren, 
Who cares, if you make, -- fay with the velvet eyes, 
Rhythm, perfume, glimmer; my one and only queen! 
The world less hideous, the minutes less leaden?

Hymn to Beauty

Did you spring out of heaven or the abyss, 
Beauty? Your gaze infernal, yet divine, 
Spreads infamy and glory, grief and bliss, 
And therefore you can be compared to wine.

Your eyes contain both sunset and aurora: 
You give off scents, like evenings storm-deflowered: 
Your kisses are a philtre: an amphora 
Your mouth, that cows the brave, and spurs the coward.

Climb you from gulfs, or from the stars descend? 
Fate, like a fawning hound, to heel you've brought; 
You scatter joy and ruin without end, 
Ruling all things, yet answering for naught.

You trample men to death, and mock their clamour. 
Amongst your gauds pale Horror gleams and glances, 
And Murder, not the least of them in glamour, 
On your proud belly amorously dances.

The dazzled insect seeks your candle-rays, 
Crackles, and burns, and seems to bless his doom. 
The groom bent o'er his bride as in a daze, 
Seems, like a dying man, to stroke his tomb.

What matter if from hell or heaven born, 
Tremendous monster, terrible to view? 
Your eyes and smile reveal to me, like morn, 
The Infinite I love but never knew.

From God or Fiend? Siren or Sylph ? Invidious 
The answer -- Fay with eyes of velvet, ray, 
Rhythm, and perfume! -- if you make less hideous 
Our universe, less tedious leave our day.

Hymn to Beauty

Did you fall from high heaven or surge from the abyss, 
O Beauty? Your bright gaze, infernal and divine, 
Confusedly pours out courage and cowardice, 
Or love and crime. Therefore men liken you to wine.

Your eyes hold all the sunset and the dawn, you are 
As rich in fragrances as a tempestuous night, 
Your kisses are a philtre and your mouth a jar 
Filling the child with valor and the man with fright.

Did the stars mould you or the pit's obscurity? 
You bring at random Paradise or Juggernaut. 
Fate sniffs your skirts with a charmed dog's servility, 
You govern all and yet are answerable for naught.

Beauty, you walk on corpses of dead men you mock. 
Among your store of gems, Horror is not the least; 
Murder, amid the dearest trinkets of your stock, 
Dances on your proud belly like a ruttish beast.

Candle, the transient moth flies dazzled to your light, 
Crackles and flames and says: "Blessed this fiery doom!" 
The panting lover with his mistress in the night 
Looks like a dying man caressing his own tomb.

Are you from heaven or hell, Beauty that we adore? 
Who cares? A dreadful, huge, ingenuous monster, you!
So but your glance, your smile, your foot open a door
Upon an Infinite I love but never knew.

From Satan or from God? Who cares? Fierce or serene,
Who cares? Sister to sirens or to seraphim?
So but, dark fey, you shed your perfume, rhythm and sheen
To make the world less hideous and Time less grim.

Hymn to Beauty

From heaven or hell, O Beauty, come you hence?
Out from your gaze, infernal and divine,
Pours blended evil and beneficence,
And therefore men have likened you to wine.

Sunset and dawn within your eyes are fair;
Stormlike you scatter perfume into space;
Your kiss, a philtre from an amphora rare,
Charms boys to courage and makes heroes base.

Whence come you, from what spheres, or inky deeps,
With careless hand joy and distress to strew?
Fate, like a dog at heel, behind you creeps;
You govern all things here, and naught you rue.

You walk upon the dead with scornful glances,
Among your gems Horror is not least fair;
Murder, the dearest of your baubles, dances
Upon your haughty breast with amorous air.

Mothlike around your flame the transient, turning,
Crackles and flames and cries, "Ah, heavenly doom!"
The quivering lover o'er his mistress yearning
Is but a dying man who woos his tomb.

From heaven or the abyss? Let questioning be,
O artless monster wreaking endless pain,
So that your smile and glance throw wide to me
An infinite that I have loved in vain.

From Satan or from God? Holy or vile?
Let questioning rest. O soft-eyed sprite, my queen,
O rhythm, perfume, light -- so you beguile
Time from his slothfulness, the world from spleen.

Hymn to Beauty

Be thou from Hell upsprung or Heaven descended,
Beauty! thy look demoniac and divine
Pours good and evil things confusedly blended,
And therefore art thou likened unto wine.

Thine eye with dawn is filled, with twilight dwindles,
Like winds of night thou sprinklest perfumes mild;
Thy kiss, that is a spell, the child's heart kindles,
Thy mouth, a chalice, makes the man a child.

Fallen from the stars or risen from gulfs of error,
Fate dogs thy glamoured garments like a slave;
With wanton hands thou scatterest joy and terror,
And rulest over all, cold as the grave.

Thou tramplest on the dead, scornful and cruel,
Horror coils like an amulet round thine arms,
Crime on thy superb bosom is a jewel
That dances amorously among its charms.

The dazzled moth that flies to thee, the candle,
Shrivels and burns, blessing thy fatal flame;
The lover that dies fawning o'er thy sandal
Fondles his tomb and breathes the adored name.

What if from Heaven or Hell thou com'st, immortal
Beauty? O sphinx-like monster, since alone
Thine eye, thy smile, thy hand opens the portal
Of the Infinite I love and have not known.

What if from God or Satan be the evangel?
Thou my sole Queen! Witch of the velvet eyes!
Since with thy fragrance, rhythm and light, O Angel!
In a less hideous world time swiftlier flies.

Hymn to Beauty

O Beauty! dost thou generate from Heaven or from Hell? 
Within thy glance, so diabolic and divine, 
Confusedly both wickedness and goodness dwell, 
And hence one might compare thee unto sparkling wine. 

Thy look containeth both the dawn and sunset stars, 
Thy perfumes, as upon a sultry night exhale, 
Thy kiss a philter, and thy mouth a Grecian vase, 
That renders heroes cowardly and infants hale. 

Yea, art thou from the planets, or the fiery womb? 
The demon follows in thy train, with magic fraught, 
Thou scatter'st seeds haphazardly of joy and doom, 
Thou govern'st everything, but answer'st unto nought. 

O Loveliness! thou spurnest corpses with delight, 
Among thy jewels, Horror hath such charms for thee, 
And Murder 'mid thy mostly cherished trinklets bright, 
Upon thy massive bosom dances amorously. 

The blinded, fluttering moth towards the candle flies, 
Then frizzles, falls, and falters -- "Blessings unto thee"--
The panting swain that o'er his beauteous mistress sighs, 
Seems like the Sick, that stroke their gravestones lovingly. 

What matter, if thou comest from the Heavens or Hell, 
O Beauty, frightful ghoul, ingenuous and obscure! 
So long thine eyes, thy smile, to me the way can tell 
Towards that Infinite I love, but never saw. 

From God or Satan? Angel, Mermaid, Proserpine? 
What matter if thou makest -- blithe, voluptuous sprite --
With rhythms, perfumes, visions -- O mine only queen! --
The universe less hideous and the hours less trite. 

Hymn to Beauty

Comest thou from high heaven or from the abyss, 
O Beauty? For thy look, hellish, divine, 
Is fraught with mingled misery and bliss 
(Wherefore thy soul is as the soul of wine). 

Within thine eye red dawn and sunset burn; 
Odours thou spread'st as stormy evenings; 
Thy kisses are a draught, thy mouth an urn 
To make men quail and babes do mighty things. 

From the dark gulf, or from the immortal stars? 
The charmed Demon follows like a hound; 
Thou rul'st with hand that careless makes or mars, 
Nor to our prayers vouchsafest any sound. 

Thou walkest over dead men, mocking them, 
Beauty! and horror decks the throat of thee. 
And glittering murder, thy most precious gem, 
On thy proud belly dances amorously. 

Toward thee, flame, the dazzled insect flies. 
Shrivels and cries, "Blest conqueror of gloom!"
Upon his fair one's breast the lover lies, 
As 'twere a dying man who hugs his tomb. 

Naive, terrible form! what boots it sky or pit, 
O beauty! if thine eye, smile, foot, alone 
Can open me the gate of an infinite 
My soul's athirst for, and has never known? 

What boots it, seraph or siren, from God's height 
Or Satan's hell, O queen! if thou dost come 
Soft-eyed, to make, with rhythm, scent, and light, 
The world less dull and time less burdensome? 

Head of Hair

O fleecy hair, falling in curls to the shoulders! 
O black locks! O perfume laden with nonchalance! 
Ecstasy! To people the dark alcove tonight 
With memories sleeping in that thick head of hair. 
I would like to shake it in the air like a scarf!

Sweltering Africa and languorous Asia, 
A whole far-away world, absent, almost defunct, 
Dwells in your depths, aromatic forest! 
While other spirits glide on the wings of music, 
Mine, O my love! floats upon your perfume.

I shall go there, where trees and men, full of vigor, 
Are plunged in a deep swoon by the heat of the land; 
Heady tresses be the billows that carry me away! 
Ebony sea, you hold a dazzling dream 
Of rigging, of rowers, of pennons and of masts:

A clamorous harbor where my spirit can drink 
In great draughts the perfume, the sound and the color; 
Where the vessels gliding through the gold and the moire 
Open wide their vast arms to embrace the glory 
Of a clear sky shimmering with everlasting heat.

I shall bury my head enamored with rapture
In this black sea where the other is imprisoned;
And my subtle spirit caressed by the rolling
Will find you once again, O fruitful indolence,
Endless lulling of sweet-scented leisure!

Blue-black hair, pavilion hung with shadows, 
You give back to me the blue of the vast round sky; 
In the downy edges of your curling tresses 
I ardently get drunk with the mingled odors 
Of oil of coconut, of musk and tar.

A long time! Forever! my hand in your thick mane 
Will scatter sapphires, rubies and pearls, 
So that you will never be deaf to my desire! 
Aren't you the oasis of which I dream, the gourd 
From which I drink deeply, the wine of memory?

Her Hair

O fleece that down her nape rolls, plume on plume! 
O curls! O scent of nonchalance and ease! 
What ecstasy! To populate this room 
With memories it harbours in its gloom, 
I'd shake it like a banner on the breeze.

Hot Africa and languid Asia play 
(An absent world, defunct, and far away) 
Within that scented forest, dark and dim. 
As other souls on waves of music swim, 
Mine on its perfume sails, as on the spray.

I'll journey there, where man and sap-filled tree 
Swoon in hot light for hours. Be you my sea, 
Strong tresses! Be the breakers and gales 
That waft me. Your black river holds, for me, 
A dream of masts and rowers, flames and sails.

A port, resounding there, my soul delivers 
With long deep draughts of perfumes, scent, and clamour, 
Where ships, that glide through gold and purple rivers, 
Fling wide their vast arms to embrace the glamour 
Of skies wherein the heat forever quivers.

I'll plunge my head in it, half drunk with pleasure -- 
In this black ocean that engulfs her form. 
My soul, caressed with wavelets there may measure 
Infinite rocking in embalmed leisure, 
Creative idleness that fears no storm!

Blue tresses, like a shadow-stretching tent, 
You shed the blue of heavens round and far. 
Along its downy fringes as I went 
I reeled half-drunken to confuse the scent 
Of oil of coconuts, with musk and tar.

My hand forever in your mane so dense, 
Rubies and pearls and sapphires there will sow, 
That you to my desire be never slow -- 
Oasis of my dreams, and gourd from whence 
Deep-draughted wines of memory will flow.

The Fleece

O shadowy fleece that falls and curls upon those bare
Lithe shoulders! O rich perfume of forgetfulness!
O ecstasy! To loose upon the midnight air
The memories asleep in this tumultuous hair,
I long to rake it in my fingers, tress by tress!

Asia the languorous, the burning solitude 
Of Africa -- a whole world, distant, all but dead -- 
Survives in thy profundities, O odorous wood! 
My soul, as other souls put forth on the deep flood 
Of music, sails away upon thy scent instead.

There where the sap of life mounts hot in man and tree, 
And lush desire untamed swoons in the torrid zone, 
Undulant tresses, wild strong waves, oh, carry me! 
Dream, like a dazzling sun, from out this ebony sea 
Rises; and sails and banks of rowers propel me on.

All the confusion, all the mingled colors, cries, 
Smells of a busy port, upon my senses beat; 
Where smoothly on the golden streaked ripples flies 
The barque, its arms outspread to gather in the skies, 
Against whose glory trembles the unabating heat.

In this black ocean where the primal ocean roars,
Drunken, in love with drunkenness, I plunge and drown;
Over my dubious spirit the rolling tide outpours
Its peace -- oh, fruitful indolence, upon thy shores,
Cradled in languor, let me drift and lay me down!

Blue hair, darkness made palpable, like the big tent 
Of desert sky all glittering with many a star 
Thou coverest me -- oh, I am drugged as with the blent 
Effluvia of a sleeping caravan, the scent 
Of coco oil impregnated with musk and tar.

Fear not! Upon this savage mane for ever thy lord 
Will sow pearls, sapphires, rubies, every stone that gleams, 
To keep thee faithful! Art not thou the sycamored 
Oasis whither my thoughts journey, and the dark gourd 
Whereof I drink in long slow draughts the wine of dreams?

Of Her Hair

O fleece, billowing on her neck! O ecstasy!
O curls, O perfume rich with nonchalance, O rare!.
Tonight to fill the alcove's warm obscurity,
To make that hair evoke each dormant memory,
I long to wave it like a kerchief in the air.

Africa smoldering and Asia languorous,
A whole far distant world, absent and almost spent,
Dwells in your forest depths, mystic and odorous!
As others lose themselves in the harmonious,
So, love, my heart floats lost upon your haunting scent.

I shall go where both man and tree, albeit strong,
Swoon deep beneath the rays of sunlight's blazing fires.
Thick tresses, be the waves to bear my dreams along!
Ebony sea, your dazzling dream contains a throng
Of sails, of wafts, of oarsmen, and of masts like spires.

A noisy harbor where my thirsty soul may drain
Hues, sounds and fragrances, in draughts heavy and sweet,
Where vessels gliding down a moire-and-gold sea lane
Open their vast arms wide to clutch at the domain
Of a pure sky ashimmer with eternal beat.

Deep shall I plunge my head, avid of drunkenness,
In this black sea wherein the other sea lies captured,
And my soul buoyant at its undulant caress
Shall find you once again, O fruitful idleness,
O long lullings of ease, soft, honeyed and enraptured.

O blue-black hair, pennon with sheen and shadow fraught,
You give me back the vast blue skies of dawn and dusk,
As on the downy edges of your tresses, caught
In your soft curls, I grow drunken and hot, distraught
By mingled scents of cocoanut and tar and musk.

Sapphires, rubies, pearls -- my hand shall never tire
Of strewing these through your thick mane -- how lavishly! -- 
Lest Life should ever turn you deaf to my desire!
You are the last oasis where I dream, afire,
The gourd whence deep I quaff the wine of memory.

La Chevelure

O fleece, that foams down unto the shoulders bare! 
O curls, O scents which lovely languidness exhale! 
Delight! to fill this alcove's sombre atmosphere 
With memories, sleeping deep within this tress of hair, 
I'll wave it in the evening breezes like a veil! 

The shores of Africa, and Asia's burning skies, 
A world forgotten, distant, nearly dead and spent, 
Within thy depths, O aromatic forest! lies. 
And like to spirits floating unto melodies, 
Mine own, Beloved! glides within thy sacred scent. 

There I will hasten, where the trees and humankind 
With languor lull beside the hot and silent sea;
Strong tresses bear me, be to me the waves and wind!
Within thy fragrance lies a dazzling dream confined 
Of sails and masts and flames -- O lake of ebony! 

A loudly echoing harbour, where my soul may hold 
To quaff, the silver cup of colours, scents and sounds, 
Wherein the vessels glide upon a sea of gold, 
And stretch their mighty arms, the glory to enfold 
Of virgin skies, where never-ending heat abounds. 

I'll plunge my brow, enamoured with voluptuousness 
Within this darkling ocean of infinitude, 
Until my subtle spirit, which thy waves caress, 
Shall find you once again, O fertile weariness;
Unending lullabye of perfumed lassitude! 

Ye tresses blue -- recess of strange and sombre shades, 
Ye make the azure of the starry Realm immense;
Upon the downy beeches, by your curls' cascades, 
Among your mingling fragrances, my spirit wades 
To cull the musk and cocoa-nut and lotus scents. 

Long -- foraye -- my hand, within thy heavy mane, 
Shall scatter rubies, pearls, sapphires eternally, 
And thus my soul's desire for thee shall never wane;
For art not thou the oasis where I dream and drain 
With draughts profound, the golden wine of memory? 

La Chevelure

O billows flowing o'er the shoulders bare! 
O curls! O perfume sweet beyond belief! 
Here in this bower to people the night air 
With all the memories sleeping in this hair 
I long to shake it like a handkerchief! 

Fierce Afric and the languorous Orient, 
All a vast world, distant, nay, almost dead, 
Within this aromatic wood is pent; 
My soul beloved floats upon thy scent 
As other souls have music for a bed. 

I will go out where full-veined man and tree 
Swoon daylong in the sultry summer's heat --
Strong tresses be the barque which carries me: 
Thou boldest a bright dream, O ebon sea. 
Of sails, flames, rowers, on a splendid fleet; 

A harbour where through every sense are rolled 
Vast sweeping waves of perfume, sound, and hue, 
Where vessels gliding over moire and gold 
Stretch up great arms to heaven to enfold 
The glory of the everlasting blue. 

There waits for me delicious drunkenness 
In this dark sea which holds those other seas; 
My spirit in the gentle main's caress 
Shall know once more the old rich idleness, 
Infinite rockings of embalmed ease. 

Ah! dark-blue, streaming banner of the night, 
You bring me back those azure skies afar, 
Plunged in your silken folds my soul takes flight 
And drinks once more with measureless delight 
The scent of cocoa-oil and musk and tar. 

For ever I will scatter in each strand, 
That thou may'st never turn deaf ears to me, 
Rubies, pearls, sapphires with a lavish hand. . . . 
Thou art the well-spring in a desert land 
Wherefrom I quaff deep draughts of memory. 

The Head of Hair

O Fleece, foaming to the neck!
O curls! O scent of laziness!
Ecstasy! This evening, to people the dark corners
Of memories that are sleeping in these locks,
I would wave them in the air like a handkerchief!

Languorous Asia and burning Africa, 
A whole world, distant, absent, almost extinct, 
Lives in the depths of your perfumed jungle; 
As other souls sail along on music, 
So mine, O my love, swims on your scent.

I shall go over there where trees and men, full of sap, 
Faint away slowly in the passionate climate; 
O strong locks, be the sea-swell that transports me! 
You keep, O sea of ebony, a dazzling dream 
Of sails and sailormen, flames and masts:

A resounding haven where in great waves
My soul can drink the scent, the sound and color;
Where ships, sliding in gold and watered silk,
Part their vast arms to embrace the glory
Of the pure sky shuddering with eternal heat

I shall plunge my head, adoring drunkenness,
Into this black ocean where the other is imprisoned;
And my subtle spirit caressed by the sway
Will know how to find you, O pregnant idleness!
In an infinite cradle of scented leisure!

Blue hair, house of taut darkness,
You make the blue of the sky seem huge and round for me;
On the downy edges of your twisted locks
I hungrily get drunk on the muddled fragrances
Of coconut oil, of musk and tar

For a long time! For ever! Amongst your heavy mane 
My hand will strew the ruby, pearl and sapphire 
To make you never deaf to my desire!
For are you not the oasis where I dream, the gourd 
Where in great draughts I gulp the wine of memory?

The Duel

Two warriors rushed upon each other; their arms 
Spattered the air with sparks and blood. 
This fencing, this clashing of steel, are the uproar 
Of youth when it becomes a prey to puling love.

The blades are broken! like our youth
My darling! But the teeth, the steely fingernails,
Soon avenge the sword and the treacherous dagger.
-- O Fury of mature hearts embittered by love!

In the ravine haunted by lynxes and panthers, 
Our heroes viciously clasping each other, rolled, 
And their skin will put blooms on the barren brambles.

This abyss, it is hell, thronged with our friends!
Let us roll there without remorse, cruel amazon,
So the ardor of our hatred will be immortalized!

Duel

Two fighters rushed together: sabres bleak 
With crimson blood-gouts lit the air above. 
That clinking swordplay was the tender squeak 
Of youth , when it's a prey to bleating love.

The swords are splintered, like our youth, my darling, 
And now it's teeth and talons are the fashion. 
The clash of swords is child's play to the snarling 
Of hearts adult in ulcerated passion.

In the ravine by lynx and leopard haunted, 
Our heroes, wrestling heroes, roll undaunted. 
Rags of their skin flower red upon the gorse.

This gulf is hell, and peopled by our friends. 
Here, hellcat! Come, let's roll without remorse 
To celebrate a feud that never ends!

The Duel

Two warriors dueled upon the battle ground, 
Their arms scattering bright sparks and blood; above 
This sport, the clash of steel gave forth the sound 
Of youth fallen a prey to puling love.

The blades are broken, darling, like the moon 
Of our sweet youth! but teeth and fingernails 
Avenge the sword and traitorous dagger soon.
Old hearts that love's old bitterness assails!

In the ravine where lynx and panther ramble, 
Our heroes bite the dust in fierce embrace, 
Their skin shall bring new bloom to the dry bramble. 
This pit is hell, our friends' choice dwelling place! 
Let us roll there, O cruel Amazon, 
So our fierce hatred may live on and on!

The One Possessed

The sun was covered with a crape. Like him, 
Moon of my life! swathe yourself with darkness; 
Sleep or smoke as you will; be silent, be somber, 
And plunge your whole being into Ennui's abyss;

I love you thus! However, if today you wish,
Like an eclipsed star that leaves the half-light,
To strut in the places which Madness encumbers,
That is fine! Charming poniard spring out of your sheath!

Light your eyes at the flame of the lusters! 
Kindle passion in the glances of churls! 
To me you're all pleasure, morbid or petulant;

Be what you will, black night, red dawn;
There is no fiber in my whole trembling body
That does not cry: "Dear Beelzebub, I adore you!"

The Possessed

The sun in crepe has muffled up his fire. 
Moon of my life! Half shade yourself like him. 
Slumber or smoke. Be silent and be dim, 
And in the gulf of boredom plunge entire;

I love you thus! However, if you like, 
Like some bright star from its eclipse emerging, 
To flaunt with Folly where the crowds are surging -- 
Flash, lovely dagger, from your sheath and strike!

Light up your eyes from chandeliers of glass! 
Light up the lustful looks of louts that pass! 
Morbid or petulant, I thrill before you.

Be what you will, black night or crimson dawn;
No fibre of my body tautly-drawn,
But cries: "Beloved demon, I adore you!"

The Possessed One

The sun is enveloped in crape! like it, 
O Moon of my Life! wrap thyself up in shade;
At will, smoke or slumber, be silent, be staid, 
And dive deep down in Dispassion's dark pit. 

I cherish thee thus! But if 'tis thy mood, 
Like a star that from out its penumbra appears, 
To float in the regions where madness careers, 
Fair dagger! burst forth from thy sheath! 'tis good. 

Yea, light up thine eyes at the Fire of Renown! 
Or kindle desire by the looks of some clown! 
Thine All is my joy, whether dull or aflame! 

Just be what thou wilt, black night, dawn divine, 
There is not a nerve in my trembling frame 
But cries, "I adore thee, Beelzebub mine!"

A Phantom

I The Darkness

In the mournful vaults of fathomless gloom
To which Fate has already banished me,
Where a bright, rosy beam never enters;
Where, alone with Night, that sullen hostess,

I'm like a painter whom a mocking God 
Condemns to paint, alas! upon darkness; 
Where, a cook with a woeful appetite, 
I boil and I eat my own heart;

At times there shines, and lengthens, and broadens
A specter made of grace and of splendor;
By its dreamy, oriental manner,

When it attains its full stature, 
I recognize my lovely visitor; 
It's She! dark and yet luminous.

II The Perfume

Reader, have you at times inhaled 
With rapture and slow greediness 
That grain of incense which pervades a church, 
Or the inveterate musk of a sachet?

Profound, magical charm, with which the past, 
Restored to life, makes us inebriate! 
Thus the lover from an adored body 
Plucks memory's exquisite flower.

From her tresses, heavy and elastic,
Living sachet, censer for the bedroom,
A wild and savage odor rose,

And from her clothes, of muslin or velvet, 
All redolent of her youth's purity, 
There emanated the odor of furs.

III The Frame

As a lovely frame adds to a painting,
Even though it's from a master's brush,
An indefinable strangeness and charm
By isolating it from vast nature,

Thus jewels, metals, gilding, furniture, 
Suited her rare beauty to perfection; 
Nothing dimmed its flawless splendor; 
All seemed to form for her a frame.

One would even have said that she believed
That everything wished to love her; she drowned
Her nudity voluptuously

In the kisses of the satin and linen, 
And, with each movement, slow or brusque, 
She showed the child-like grace of a monkey.

IV The Portrait

Disease and Death make ashes
Of all the fire that flamed for us.
Of those wide eyes, so fervent and tender,
Of that mouth in which my heart was drowned,

Of those kisses potent as dittany,
Of those transports more vivid than sunbeams,
What remains? It is frightful, O my soul!
Nothing but a faint sketch, in three colors,

Which, like me, is dying in solitude,
And which Time, that contemptuous old man,
Grazes each day with his rough wing...

Black murderer of Life and Art,
You will never kill in my memory
The one who was my glory and my joy!

A Phantom

I The Shades

My fate confines me, dark and shady, 
In vaults of lone unfathomed grief. 
No rosy sunbeams bring relief. 
Alone with Night, my grim landlady,

I'm like a painter whom God spites 
To paint on shades, and cook and eat 
My own poor heart, the only meat 
Of my funereal appetites.

Sometimes a spectre dim, reclining 
In grace and glory, can be seen. 
With dreamy oriental mien.

When fully its own form defining, 
I recognise who it must be, 
Sombre yet luminous, it's She!

II The Perfume

Reader, say, have you ever breathed, 
With lazy greed and joy, the dusk 
Of an old church with incense wreathed, 
Or smelt an ancient bag of musk?

It's by such charms the Nevermore 
Intoxicates us in the Now -- 
As lovers to Remembrance bow 
Over the bodies they adore.

From her thick tresses as they fume 
(Scent-sack and censer of the room) 
A feline, tawny perfume springs.

Her muslins and her velvets smooth 
Give off, made pregnant with her youth, 
Scents of the fur of prowling things.

III The Frame

As a fine frame improves a plate 
Although the graver needs no vaunting -- 
I know not what of strange and haunting 
(From nature vast to isolate

Her beauty) was conferred by gems, 
Metals, and gear. She mingled with them, 
And swirled them all into her rhythm 
As in her skirts the flouncing herns.

They say she thought all things were stung 
With love for her. Her naked flesh 
She loved to drown in kisses fresh

Of flax or satin. To her clung, 
In all the movements of her shape, 
The childish graces of the ape.

IV The Portrait

Sickness and death will form the ash and dust
Of all the fire we blazed with in such splendour,
Of those great eyes so fervent and so tender,
The mouth wherein my heart would drown its lust,

The kisses strong as marum, the delightful,
Fierce transports livelier than the solar rays.
What can remain? My soul, the truth is frightful!
A fading sketch, a faint three-coloured haze,

Which (like myself unfriended) wanes away,
While Time, insulting dotard, every day,
Brushes it fainter with his heedless wing...

Killer of life and art! black, evil King!
You'll never kill, within my soul, the story 
Of that which was my rapture and my glory.

Portrait

Disease and Death make ashes out of all 
The fires that flamed for us, out of the round 
Wide eyes, so fervent and so kind withal, 
Out of the mouth wherein my heart was drowned, 
Out of our kisses, strong as pepperwort, 
Out of throes bright as patterns sunbeams etch.
What is left now? What dreadful last resort, 
O Soul? Only a faint three-colored sketch 

Which is, like me, a lonely dying thing, 
And which that oldster Time with scornful heart 
Bruises each day beneath his jagged wing.
Slayer of Life and murderer of Art, 
Mine, still, one treasure you shall not destroy: 
She who was all my glory and my joy!

(The original publication only includes this last section of the poem.)

The Portrait

Disease and Death, these are the ashes of
All that was fire, and warmed us heretofore.
Of those big eyes, so full of faith and love,
That mouth which stopped my heart, that endless store

Of kisses strong as dittany -- that whole 
Transport, that passion hotter than the sun, 
What now remains? A sorry thing, my soul! 
A faded sketch, in three pale crayons done;

Which, like myself, in dusty solitude
Subsides, and which with his injurious wing
Time daily rubs against. O black and rude

Assassin of proud Life and powerful Art: 
You cannot rob my memory of one thing, -- 
Her, that was all my triumph, all my heart.

(The original publication only includes this last section of the poem.)

Un Fantome

I Les Tenebres

down in the unplumbed crypt of blight
where Fate abandoned me to die,
where falls no cheering ray; where I,
sole lodger of the sulky Night,

like artists blind God sets apart
in mockery -- I paint the murk;
where, like a ghoulish cook at work,
I boil and munch upon my heart,

momently gleams, and grows apace,
a phantom languorously bright,
and by its dreamy Orient grace,

when it attains its radiant height,
at last I know the lovely thing:
'tis She! girl black yet glimmering.

II Le Parfum

how long, in silken favours, last
their prisoned scents! how greedily
we breathe the incense-grain, a sea
of fragrance, in cathedrals vast!

o deep enchanting sorcery!
in present joys to find the past!
'tis thus on cherished flesh amassed
Love culls the flower of memory.

her thick curled hair, like bags of musk
or living censers, left the dusk
with strange wild odours all astir,

and, from her lace and velvet busk,
-- candid and girlish, over her, 
hovered a heavy scent of fur.

III Le Cadre

as framing to a portrait gives
-- though from a famous brush it be --
a magic full of mystery
secluding it from all that lives,

so gems, divans, gold, steel became
her beauty's border and attire;
no pomp obscured its perfect fire,
all seemed to serve her as a frame.

one even might have said she found
all sought to love her, for she drowned
in kisses of her silks and laces,

her fair nude body, all a-quiver,
and swift or slow, each pose would give her
a host of girlish simian graces.

IV Le Portrait

Death and Disease to ashes turn
all flames that wrapped our youth around.
of her soft eyes, so quick to burn, 
her mouth, wherein my heart was drowned.

of her wild kisses' tyrannies,
her passion's blaze implacable --
drear heart! what now is left of these?
only a faded old pastel

dying, like me, in loneliness,
duller each day in every part,
stripped by Time's pinion merciless...

black murderer of life and art,
never shalt thou destroy in me
her, once my pride and ecstasy!

A Ghost

I Perfume

Reader, have you ever breathed in
With intoxication and slow gluttony, 
That grain of incense which fills a church, 
Or that embedded musk of a scent-bag?

Deep, magical charm, the past recalled 
By you now makes us drunk. 
Thus a lover plucks from an adored body 
The exquisite flower of memory.

From her buoyant, heavy hair,
A living sachet, censer of recesses,
There climbs a fragrance, savage, wild,

And from her muslin or velvet dresses, 
Permeated with her pure youth, 
Escapes a perfume of fur.

II The Frame

As a fine frame adds to its picture, 
Though it may come from a well-known brush, 
Thus jewels, furniture, metals or gilding 
Adapted themselves quite to her unusual beauty;

it was some strange enchantment, 
Parting her from enormous nature; 
Nothing darkened her perfect pellucidity, 
Everything seemed to serve her as frame.

At times one would even have said that she thought
That all things desired to love her; voluptuously
She drowned her nakedness

In kisses of satin and linen, 
And, slow or sudden, in each movement 
Showed the childlike grace of the monkey.

(The original publication only includes these two sections of the poem.)

Ever the Same

"Whence comes to you, you asked, this singular sadness
That rises like the sea on the naked, black rock?"
-- Once our heart has gathered the grapes from its vineyard,
Living is an evil. That's a secret known to all,

A simple pain, with no mystery, 
As obvious to all men as your gaiety. 
So abandon your search, inquisitive beauty; 
And though your voice is sweet, be still!

Be silent, ignorant! ever enraptured soul! 
Mouth with the child-like laugh! Still more than Life, 
Death holds us frequently with subtle bonds.

Let, let my heart become drunk with a <i>lie;</i> let it 
Plunge into your fair eyes as into a fair dream 
And slumber long in the shadow of your lashes.

Semper Eadem

"Whence," ask you, "does this strange new sadness flow
Like rising tides on rocks, black, bare, and vast?"
For human hearts, when vintage-time is past,
To live is bad. That secret all men know -- 

An obvious sorrow, with no mystery, shown, 
Clear as your joy, to everyone around. 
O curious one, seek nothing more profound, 
And speak not, though your voice be sweet in tone.

Hush, ignorant! Hush, soul that's still enraptured, 
And mouth of childish laughter! Neatly captured, 
Death pulls us, more than life, with subtle wile.

Oh let my thought get drunk upon a lie, 
And plunge, as in a dream, in either eye, 
And in their lashes' shadow sleep awhile!

Semper Eadem

"What in the world," you said, "has brought on this black mood, 
Climbing you as the sea climbs up a naked reef?"
-- When once the heart has made its harvest (understood 
By all men, this) why, just to be alive is grief:

A pain quite simple, nothing mysterious at all, 
And like that joy of yours, patent to all we meet; 
Stop asking questions, then, I beg of you, and fall 
Silent a while, fair prober, though your voice be sweet.

Ah, yes, be silent, ignorant girl, always so gay, 
Mouth with the childlike laughter! More than Life, I say, 
Death has the power to hold us by most subtle ties.

My one fictitious comfort, kindly, let me keep: 
To plunge as into dreams into your lovely eyes, 
And in the shadow of your lashes fall asleep.

Semper Eadem

"From whence it comes, you ask, this gloom acute, 
Like waves that o'er the rocky headland fall?"
When once our hearts have gathered in their fruit, 
To live is a curse! a secret known to all, 

A grief, quite simple, nought mysterious, 
And like your joy -- for all, both loud and shrill, 
Nay cease to clamor, be not e'er so curious! 
And yet although your voice is sweet, be still! 

Be still, O soul, with rapture ever rife! 
O mouth, with the childish smile! Far more than Life, 
The subtle bonds of Death around us twine. 

Let -- let my heart, the wine of falsehood drink, 
And dream-like, deep within your fair eyes sink, 
And in the shade of thy lashes long recline! 

Semper eadam

you asked: "what floods of gloom engulf you -- strange
as creeping tides against a bare black wall?"
-- when hearts once crush their grapes and close the grange,
life is an evil. secret known to all,

'tis but the common grief each man betrays
to all, as you your joy, in eyes or brow
so veil, my fair one, your inquiring gaze
and though your voice is low, be silent now!

be silent, simple soul! mouth always gay
with girlish laughter! more than Life, today,
Death binds our hearts with tenuous webs of doom;

let mine be drunken with the wine of lies,
o let me delve for dreams in those deep eyes
and slumber long beneath your eyebrows' gloom!

Semper Eadem

"Whence," ask you, "is this heavy sadness shed. 
Rising like ocean round the bare black stone?"
When the heart's crop has once been harvested 
Life is a burden! 'Tis of all men known. 

A simple grief and not mysterious, 
Blown like thy joy for all the world: so cease, 
Cease, O fair questioner, to probe me thus, 
And, though thy voice be gentle, hold thy peace. 

Hold thy peace, rapturous one! Child's mouth so rife 
With merriment. Death's links with us oft seem 
Subtler than those which bind our souls to Life. 

Let, let my heart grow drunken with a lie, 
And plunge in thy great eyes as in a dream. 
And slumber 'neath thy lashes tranquilly! 

Song of Autumn

I

Soon we shall plunge into the cold darkness; 
Farewell, vivid brightness of our short-lived summers! 
Already I hear the dismal sound of firewood 
Falling with a clatter on the courtyard pavements.

All winter will possess my being: wrath, 
Hate, horror, shivering, hard, forced labor, 
And, like the sun in his polar Hades, 
My heart will be no more than a frozen red block.

All atremble I listen to each falling log; 
The building of a scaffold has no duller sound. 
My spirit resembles the tower which crumbles 
Under the tireless blows of the battering ram.

It seems to me, lulled by these monotonous shocks, 
That somewhere they're nailing a coffin, in great haste. 
For whom? -- Yesterday was summer; here is autumn 
That mysterious noise sounds like a departure.

II

I love the greenish light of your long eyes, 
Sweet beauty, but today all to me is bitter; 
Nothing, neither your love, your boudoir, nor your hearth 
Is worth as much as the sunlight on the sea.

Yet, love me, tender heart! be a mother, 
Even to an ingrate, even to a scapegrace; 
Mistress or sister, be the fleeting sweetness 
Of a gorgeous autumn or of a setting sun.

Short task! The tomb awaits; it is avid!
Ah! let me, with my head bowed on your knees,
Taste the sweet, yellow rays of the end of autumn,
While I mourn for the white, torrid summer!

Song of Autumn

I

Soon into frozen shades, like leaves, we'll tumble. 
Adieu, short summer's blaze, that shone to mock. 
I hear already the funereal rumble 
Of logs, as on the paving-stones they shock.

Winter will enter in my soul to dwell -- 
Rage, hate, fear, horror, labour forced and dire! 
My heart will seem, to sun that polar hell, 
A dim, red, frozen block, devoid of fire.

Shuddering I hear the heavy thud of fuel. 
The building of a gallows sounds as good!
My spirit, like a tower, reels to the cruel 
Battering-ram in every crash of wood.

The ceaseless echoes rock me and appal. 
They're nailing up a coffin, I'll be bound, 
For whom? -- Last night was Summer. Here's the Fall.
There booms a farewell volley in the sound.

II

I like die greenish light in your long eyes, 
Dear: but today all things are sour to me. 
And naught, your hearth, your boudoir, nor your sighs 
Are worth the sun that glitters on the sea.

Yet love me, tender heart, as mothers cherish 
A thankless wretch, Lover or sister, be 
Ephemeral sweetness of the suns that perish 
Or glory of the autumn swift to flee.

Brief task! The charnel yawns in hunger horrid, 
Yet let me with my head upon your knees, 
Although I mourn the summer, white and torrid 
Taste these last yellow rays before they freeze.

Chant d'automne

I

soon shall we plunge 'neath winter's icy pall;
farewell, bright fires of too-brief July!
even now I hear the knell funereal
of falling fire-logs in the court close by.

once more on me shall winter all unroll:
wrath, hatred, shivering dread, Toil's cursed vise,
and like the sun in his far hell, the pole,
my heart shall be a block of crimson ice.

I wait aghast each loud impending log;
thus, criminals 'neath rising gibbets cower.
o dreadful battering-ram! my soul, agog,
quivers and totters like a crumbling tower,

till to my dream the cradling echoes drum
like hammers madly finishing a bier.
-- for whom? -- June yesterday; now fall is come!
mysterious dirge, who has departed here?

II

I love your long green eyes of slumberous fire,
my sweet, but now all things are gall to me,
and naught, your room, your hearth nor your desire
is worth the sunlight shimmering on the sea.

yet love me, tender heart! a mother be
even to an ingrate, or a wicked one;
mistress or sister, be as sweet to me
as some brief autumn or a setting sun.

'twill not be long! the hungering tomb awaits!
ah! let me -- brow at peace upon your knees --
savour, regretful of June's parching heats,
this balmy soft October, ere it flees!

To a Madonna

Votive Offering in the Spanish Style

I want to build for you, Madonna, my mistress, 
An underground altar in the depths of my grief 
And carve out in the darkest corner of my heart, 
Far from worldly desires and mocking looks, 
A niche, all enameled with azure and with gold, 
Where you shall stand, amazed Statue; 
With my polished Verses as a trellis of pure metal 
Studded cunningly with rhymes of crystal, 
I shall make for your head an immense Crown, 
And from my Jealousy, O mortal Madonna, 
I shall know how to cut a cloak in a fashion, 
Barbaric, heavy, and stiff, lined with suspicion, 
Which, like a sentry-box, will enclose your charms; 
Embroidered not with Pearls, but with all of my Tears! 
Your Gown will be my Desire, quivering, 
Undulant, my Desire which rises and which falls, 
Balances on the crests, reposes in the troughs, 
And clothes with a kiss your white and rose body. 
Of my Self-respect I shall make you Slippers 
Of satin which, humbled by your divine feet, 
Will imprison them in a gentle embrace, 
And assume their form like a faithful mold;

If I can't, in spite of all my painstaking art,
Carve a Moon of silver for your Pedestal, 
I shall put the Serpent which is eating my heart 
Under your heels, so that you may trample and mock, 
Triumphant queen, fecund in redemptions, 
That monster all swollen with hatred and spittle. 
You will see my Thoughts like Candles in rows 
Before the flower-decked altar of the Queen of Virgins, 
Starring with their reflections the azure ceiling, 
And watching you always with eyes of fire. 
And since my whole being admires and loves you, 
All will become Storax, Benzoin, Frankincense, Myrrh, 
And ceaselessly toward you, white, snowy pinnacle, 
My turbulent spirit will rise like a vapor.

Finally, to complete your role of Mary,
And to mix love with inhumanity,
Infamous pleasure! of the seven deadly sins,
I, torturer full of remorse, shall make seven
Well sharpened Daggers and, like a callous juggler,
Taking your deepest love for a target,
I shall plant them all in your panting Heart,
In your sobbing Heart, in your bleeding Heart!

To a Madonna

(Ex Voto in Spanish Style)

I'd build, Madonna, love, for my belief, 
An altar in the dim crypt of my grief, 
And in the darkest comer of my heart, 
From mortal lust and mockery far apart, 
Scoop you a niche, with gold and azure glaze, 
Where you would stand in wonderment and gaze, 
With my pure verses trellised, and all round 
In constellated rhymes of crystal bound: 
And with a huge tiara richly crowned. 
Out of the Jealousy which rules my passion, 
Mortal Madonna, I a cloak would fashion, 
Barbarous, stiff, and heavy with my doubt, 
Whereon as in a fourm you would fill out 
And mould your lair. Of tears, not pearls, would be 
The sparkle of its rich embroidery: 
Your robe would be my lust, with waving flow, 
Poising on tips, in valleys lying low, 
And clothing, in one kiss, coral and snow. 
In my Respect (for satin) you'll be shod 
Which your white feet would humble to the clod, 
While prisoning their flesh with tender hold 
It kept their shape imprinted like a mould. 
If for a footstool to support your shoon, 
For all my art, I could not get the moon, 
I'd throw the serpent, that devours my vitals
Under your trampling heels for his requitals, 
Victorious queen, to spurn, bruise, and belittle 
That monstrous worm blown-up with hate and spittle. 
Round you my thoughts like candles should be seen
Around the flowered shrine of the virgins' Queen, 
Reflected on a roof that's painted blue, 
And aiming all their golden eyes at you. 
Since nought is in me that you do not stir, 
All will be incense, benjamin, and myrrh, 
And up to you, white peak, in clouds will soar 
My stormy soul, in rapture, to adore.

In fine, your role of Mary to perfect 
And mingle barbarism with respect -- 
Of seven deadly sins, O black delight! 
Remorseful torturer, to show my sleight, 
I'll forge and sharpen seven deadly swords 
And like a callous juggler on the boards, 
Taking it for my target, I would dart 
Them deep into your streaming, sobbing heart.

A une Madone

I'll build for thee, Madonna, mistress mine,
deep in my crypt of woe a secret shrine;
-- carve in the blackest corner of my heart,
from worldly lust and mocking eyes apart,
a niche, with gold and blue enamel blent,
to hold thy statue filled with wonderment.
my polished verse, of virgin metal hard
with crystal rhymes artistically starred,
shall raise for thee a towering diadem;
and from my jealousy I'll cut and hem
a mangle, mortal Lady mine, designed
as 'twere a sentry-box, stiff, heavy, lined
with barbs of keen suspicion and with fears,
embroidered, not with pearls, but all my tears!
to make thy robe I'll give thee my desire
that rises, falls and quivers like a fire,
clings to each summit, rests in each abyss, 
and clothes thy rosy body with a kiss.
of my respect I'll make thee buskins fine
of satin, humbled by thy feet divine,
to prison them in soft embraces warm
and like a faithful mould to preserve their form.

then if my art is powerless to cut
thy pedestal, a silver moon, I'll put
beneath thy heel the serpent in my heart
for thee to bruise and mock, because thou art
the queen of my redemption, conquering all,
even that monster spewing hate and gall.
thine altar, like the Virgin's, shall be twined
with flowers, and like tapers all aligned,
my thoughts shall light the niche: from those blue skies,
watching thee always with their fiery eyes;
and since thou holdest all the love within
my heart, as incense, myrrh and benjamin,
in clouds forevermore to thee, its goal, 
o snowy peak, shall rise my stormy soul.

and last, to make thee Mary utterly,
commingling love with savage cruelty,
-- black joy! -- with all the seven capital sins
I'll forge, remorsefully, seven javelins
knife-sharp, and like a juggler nonchalant, 
taking thy love as target, I shall plant
deep in thy heart convulsed each deadly dart
-- thy panting heart, thy sobbing, streaming heart!

To a Madonna

(An Ex-Voto in the Spanish taste.)

Madonna, mistress, I would build for thee
An altar deep in the sad soul of me;
And in the darkest corner of my heart,
From mortal hopes and mocking eyes apart,
Carve of enamelled blue and gold a shrine
For thee to stand erect in, Image divine!
And with a mighty Crown thou shalt be crowned
Wrought of the gold of my smooth Verse, set round
With starry crystal rhymes; and I will make,
O mortal maid, a Mantle for thy sake!
And weave it of my jealousy, a gown
Heavy, barbaric, stiff, and weighted down
With my distrust, and broider round the hem
Not pearls, but all my tears in place of them.
And then thy wavering, trembling robe shall be
All the desires that rise and fall in me
From mountain-peaks to valleys of repose,
Kissing thy lovely body's white and rose.
For thy humiliated feet divine,
Of my Respect I'll make thee Slippers fine
Which, prisoning them within a gentle fold,
Shall keep their imprint like a faithful mould.
And if my art, unwearying and discreet,
Can make no Moon of Silver for thy feet
To have for Footstool, then thy heel shall rest
Upon the snake that gnaws within my breast,
Victorious Queen of whom our hope is born!
And thou shalt trample down and make a scorn
Of the vile reptile swollen up with hate.
And thou shalt see my thoughts, all consecrate,
Like candles set before thy flower-strewn shrine,
O Queen of Virgins, and the taper-shine
Shall glimmer star-like in the vault of blue,
With eyes of flame for ever watching you.
While all the love and worship in my sense
Will be sweet smoke of myrrh and frankincense.
Ceaselessly up to thee, white peak of snow,
My stormy spirit will in vapours go!

And last, to make thy drama all complete,
That love and cruelty may mix and meet,
I, thy remorseful-torturer, will take
All the Seven Deadly Sins, and from them make
In darkest joy, Seven Knives, cruel-edged and keen,
And like a juggler choosing, O my Queen,
That spot profound whence love and mercy start,
I'll plunge them all within thy panting heart!

Afternoon Song

Though your mischievous eyebrows
Give you a singular air,
Not that of an angel,
Sorceress with Siren's eyes,

I adore you, my madcap, 
My ineffable passion! 
With the pious devotion 
Of a priest for his idol.

Your stiff tresses are scented 
With the desert and forest, 
Your head assumes the poses 
Of the enigma and key.

Perfume lingers about your flesh 
Like incense about a censer; 
You charm like the evening, 
Tenebrous, passionate nymph.

Ah! the most potent philtres 
Are weaker than your languor, 
And you know the caresses 
That make the dead live again!

Your haunches are enamored 
Of your back and your bosom 
And you delight the cushions 
With your languorous poses.

Sometimes, to alleviate 
Your mysterious passion, 
You lavish, resolutely, 
Your bites and your kisses;

You tear me open, dark beauty,
With derisive laughter,
And then look at my heart
With eyes as soft as moonlight

Under your satin slippers,
Under your dear silken feet,
I place all my happiness,
My genius and destiny,

My soul brought to life by you 
By your clear light and color, 
Explosion of heat 
In my dark Siberia!

Song of Afternoon

Though your eyebrows' wicked slant
Give you an intriguing air
Which the angels do not share
Sorceress, whose eyes enchant -- 

My passion, terrible yet gay, 
With all my heart I bow before you, 
With that devotion to adore you 
That priests to sacred idols pay.

Deserts and woods embalmed your hair, 
Its movements give your head the stigma 
Of sphinx-like secret and enigma, 
Both in its attitude and air.

As round a censer vapours form,
About your flesh the perfumes wander.
The selfsame charms you seem to squander
As does an evening, dark yet warm,

The strongest philtres cannot craze 
As does your indolent address 
And you have mastered a caress 
Dead corpses from their tombs to raise.

Your hips are amorous of your breast 
And of your back: your languorous pose 
Enchants the cushions where you doze 
When in their depths you make your nest.

Sometimes in order to appease
Mysterious rages in your soul,
You bite and kiss without control.
Then with a mocking laugh you tease

My heart, brown beauty, tearing it: 
Then over it the light is strewn 
Of your eye, softer than the moon, 
Till with its glance my soul is lit.

Underneath your satin shoes, 
And underneath your silken feet, 
My joy, my fate, my genius meet 
To strew the pathway of my muse.

My soul is healed, restored and made complete 
By you, all colour, warmth, and light, 
In my Siberia a bright 
Explosion as of tropic heat.

Afternoon Song

O witch with sharp alluring eyes, 
Although your evil eyebrows lend 
Your strange ways little of the friend 
And even less of angel skies, 

How I adore your madcap verve, 
How deeply rooted, my fell passion! 
I worship you in the rapt fashion 
Of priests for idols that they serve. 

Your stiff dense tresses fragrantly 
Conjure up wilderness and wood, 
Your head assumes each attitude 
Of the enigma and its key. 

Perfumes cling closely to your flesh 
As incense to a censer; bright 
And dusky nymph, you are all Night, 
Secret and passionate and fresh! 

The strongest philter vies in vain 
Power against your languidness, 
Too well you know the sweet caress 
That brings the dead to life again. 

Your haunches are enamored of 
Your supple back and surging breast, 
And when, posed torpidly, you rest, 
Your cushions taste the charms of love.

Sometimes to quell the rageful fire 
Of your mysterious lust, you lavish 
Obstinate kiss and bite to ravish 
The throbbing prey of your desire.

You rend my body to its seams, 
Dark beauty, with your mocking laughter, 
Then fill my heart a moment after 
With glances soft as the moon's beams.

Under your satin slippers, see,
Under your blest silk feet, I lay
The vast sum of my joys today,
My genius, my destiny,

My soul, enlivened by your spark 
Your radiance and color, sweet 
Explosion of fierce tropic heat 
Across my chill Siberian dark!

Sisina

Imagine Diana in elegant attire, 
Roaming through the forest, or beating the thickets, 
Hair flying in the wind, breast bare, drunk with the noise, 
Superb, defying the finest horsemen!

Have you seen Theroigne that lover of carnage, 
Urging a barefoot mob on to attack, 
Her eyes and cheeks aflame, playing her role, 
And climbing, sword in hand, the royal staircase?

That is Sisina! But the sweet amazon's soul
Is as charitable as it is murderous;
Her courage, exalted by powder and by drums,

Before supplicants, knows how to lay down its arms, 
And her heart, ravaged by love, has always, 
For him who is worthy, a reservoir of tears.

Sisina

Picture Diana, gallantly arrayed, 
Ranging the woods, elated with the chase, 
With flying hair and naked breasts displayed, 
Defying fleetest horsemen with her pace.

Know you Theroigne whom blood and fire exalt, 
Hounding a shoeless rabble to the fray, 
Up royal stairways heading the assault, 
And mounting, sword in hand, to show the way?

Such is Sisina. Terrible her arms.
But charity restrains her killing charms.
Though rolling drums and scent of powder madden

Her courage, -- laying by its pikes and spears, 
For those who merit, her scorched heart will sadden, 
And open, in its depth, a well of tears.

Sisina

Imagine Diana in gorgeous array, 
How into the forests and thickets she flies, 
With her hair in the breezes, and flushed for the fray, 
How the very best riders she proudly defies. 

Have you seen Theroigne, of the blood-thirsty heart, 
As an unshod herd to attack he bestirs, 
With cheeks all inflamed, playing up to his part, 
As he goes, sword in hand, up the royal stairs? 

And so is Sisina -- yet this warrior sweet, 
Has a soul with compassion and kindness replete, 
Inspired by drums and by powder, her sway 

Knows how to concede to the supplicants' prayers, 
And her bosom, laid waste by the flames, has alway, 
For those that are worthy, a fountain of tears. 

Autumn Sonnet

They say to me, your eyes, clear as crystal:
"For you, bizarre lover, what is my merit then?"
-- Be charming and be still! My heart, which all things irk,
Except the candor of the animals of old,

Does not wish to reveal its black secret to you, 
Whose lulling hands invite me to long sleep, 
Nor its somber legend written with flame. 
I hate passion; intelligence makes me suffer!

Let us love each other sweetly. Tenebrous Love, 
Ambushed in his shelter, stretches his fatal bow. 
I know all the weapons of his old arsenal:

Crime, horror, and madness!  -- pale marguerite! 
Are you not, like me, an autumnal sun, 
O my Marguerite, so white and so cold?

Autumn Sonnet

Your eyes like crystal ask me, clear and mute, 
"in me, strange lover, what do you admire?" 
Be lovely: hush: my heart, whom all things tire 
Except the candour of the primal brute,

Would hide from you the secret burning it 
And its black legend written out in fire, 
O soother of the sleep that I respire! 
Passion I hate, and I am hurt by wit.

Let us love gently. In his lair laid low, 
Ambushed in shades, Love strings his fatal bow. 
I know his ancient arsenal complete,

Crime, horror, lunacy -- O my pale daisy!
Are we not suns in Autumn, silver-hazy, 
O my so white, so snow-cold Marguerite?

Autumn Song

They ask me -- thy crystalline eyes, so acute, 
"Odd lover -- why am I to thee so dear?"
-- Be sweet and keep silent, my heart, which is sear, 
For all, save the rude and untutored brute, 

Is loth its infernal depths to reveal, 
And its dissolute motto engraven with fire, 
Oh charmer! whose arms endless slumber inspire! 
I abominate passion and wit makes me ill. 

So let us love gently. Within his retreat, 
Foreboding, Love seeks for his arrows a prey, 
I know all the arms of his battle array. 

Delirium and loathing -- O pale Marguerite! 
Like me, art thou not an autumnal ray, 
Alas my so white, my so cold Marguerite! 

Sonnet of Autumn

They say to me, thy clear and crystal eyes:
"Why dost thou love me so, strange lover mine?"
Be sweet, be still! My heart and soul despise
All save that antique brute-like faith of thine;

And will not bare the secret of their shame
To thee whose hand soothes me to slumbers long,
Nor their black legend write for thee in flame!
Passion I hate, a spirit does me wrong.

Let us love gently. Love, from his retreat,
Ambushed and shadowy, bends his fatal bow,
And I too well his ancient arrows know:

Crime, horror, folly. O pale Marguerite,
Thou art as I, a bright sun fallen low,
O my so white, my so cold Marguerite.

A Fantastic Print

That strange specter wears nothing more 
Than a diadem, atrocious and tawdry, 
Grotesquely fixed on his skeleton brow. 
Without spurs, without whip, he winds a horse, 
A phantom like himself, an apocalyptic steed 
That foams at the nostrils like an epileptic. 
Both of them are plunging through space 
And trampling on the infinite with daring feet. 
The horseman is waving a flaming sword 
Over the nameless crowds who are crushed by his mount 
And examines like a prince inspecting his house, 
The graveyard, immense and cold, with no horizon, 
Where lie, in the glimmer of a white, lifeless sun, 
The races of history, ancient and modern.

Fantastic Engraving

A monstrous spectre carries on his forehead, 
And at a rakish tilt, grotesquely horrid, 
A crown such as at carnivals parade. 
Without a Whip or spur he rides a jade, 
A phantom-like apocalyptic moke, 
Whose nostrils seem with rabid froth to smoke. 
Across unbounded space the couple moves 
Spurning infinity with reckless hooves. 
The horseman waves a sword that lights the gloom
Of nameless crowds he tramples to their doom, 
And, like a prince his mansion, goes inspecting 
The graveyard, which, no skyline intersecting, 
Contains, beneath a sun that's white and bleak, 
Peoples of history, modem and antique.

Fantastic Print

This eerie specter wears no clothes at all. 
A dreadful crown, reeking of carnival, 
Sits weirdly on his naked skull. Without 
Or spurs or whip, he wears his charger out 
(A ghostly and apocalyptic nag, 
Nose foaming like an epileptic hag).
The hideous pair plunge ruthlessly through space, 
Trampling infinity at breakneck pace.

The horseman's flaming sword, as on they rush, 
Fells victims that his steed has failed to crush, 
And, like a prince inspecting his domain, 
He scans the graveyard's limitless chill plain 
Where, in a dull white sun's exhausted light, 
Lies every race since man emerged from night.

Obsession

Great woods, you frighten me like cathedrals; 
You roar like the organ; and in our cursed hearts, 
Rooms of endless mourning where old death-rattles sound, 
Respond the echoes of your De profundis.

I hate you, Ocean! your bounding and your tumult, 
My mind finds them within itself; that bitter laugh 
Of the vanquished man, full of sobs and insults, 
I hear it in the immense laughter of the sea.

How I would like you, Night! without those stars 
Whose light speaks a language I know! 
For I seek emptiness, darkness, and nudity!

But the darkness is itself a canvas 
Upon which live, springing from my eyes by thousands, 
Beings with understanding looks, who have vanished.

Obsession

You forests, like cathedrals, are my dread: 
You roar like organs. Our curst hearts, like cells 
Where death forever rattles on the bed, 
Echo your de Profundis as it swells.

My spirit hates you, Ocean! sees, and loathes 
Its tumults in your own. Of men defeated 
The bitter laugh, that's full of sobs and oaths, 
Is in your own tremendously repeated.

How you would please me, Night! without your stars 
Which speak a foreign dialect, that jars 
On one who seeks the void, the black, the bare.

Yet even your darkest shade a canvas forms 
Whereon my eye must multiply in swarms 
Familiar looks of shapes no longer there.

Obsession

Great forests, you alarm me like a mighty fane;
Like organ-tones you roar, and in our hearts of stone, 
Where ancient sobs vibrate, O halls of endless pain! 
The answering echoes of your "De Profundis" moan. 

I hate thee, Ocean! hate thy tumults and thy throbs, 
My spirit finds them in himself. This bitter glee 
Of vanquished mortals, full of insults and of sobs, 
I hear it in the mighteous laughter of the sea. 

O starless night! thy loveliness my soul inhales, 
Without those starry rays which speak a language known, 
For I desire the dark, the naked and the lone. 

But e'en those darknesses themselves to me are veils, 
Where live and, by the millions 'neath my eyelids prance, 
Long, long departed Beings with familiar glance. 

Obsession

Great woods! like mighty fanes you frighten me, 
You howl like the organ; in our cursed souls, 
Grey grief-chambers where old death-rattles be, 
Your many-echoing "De profundis" rolls. 

I hate thee, Ocean! for my spirit is torn 
With tumults like thine own; a laugh has birth, 
Like a beaten man's, full of all tears and scorn 
And bitterness, within the sea's vast mirth. 

Ah! how I love thee, Night, when not a star 
Speaks with known tongue of light through the dark air; 
For lo! I seek the void, the black, the bare; 

Yet even darkest depths but curtains are 
Where live, shot from my eye, innumerable 
Lost forms and faces that I know too well. 

The Thirst for the Void

My soul, you used to love the battle's rumble. 
Hope, whose sharp spur once kindled you like flame, 
Will mount on you no more. Rest, without shame, 
Old charger, since at every step you stumble.

Sleep now the sleep of brutes, proud heart: be humble.

O broken raider, for your outworn mettle,
Love has no joys, no fight is worth disputing.
Farewell to all the trumpeting and fluting!
Pleasure, have done, when brooding shadows settle,

The blooms of spring are vanquished by the nettle.

As snows devour stiff corpses in their welter, 
Time wolfs my soul in, minute after minute. 
I've seen the world and everything that's in it, 
And I no longer seek in it for shelter;

Come, Avalanche! and sweep me helter-skelter.

Annihilation

Poor weary soul! To think how thou wouldst plunge and leap 
When the bright spur of Hope into thy flank was pressed!
He has unsaddled thee for good. Lie down and rest, 
Old spavined horse, old nag not worthy of thy keep.

Thou, too, my heart, lie down and sleep thy bestial sleep.

And thou, my mind, old highwayman, thou who didst fling 
Thyself from ambush upon every joy, go thou 
And skulk in peace. No pleasure will come near thee now; 
No joy can tempt so somber and uncouth a thing.

Gone, gone: even that infallible sweet thrill of spring!

Time blots me out, as flakes on freezing bodies fall; 
I see the whole round world, with every animal, 
And every flower, and every leaf on every branch, 
And there is absolutely nothing I like at all.

Come down and carry me away, O avalanche.

The Alchemy of Sorrow

One man lights you with his ardor,
Another puts you in mourning, Nature!
That which says to one: sepulcher!
Says to another: life! glory!

You have always frightened me, 
Hermes the unknown, you who help me. 
You make me the peer of Midas, 
The saddest of all alchemists;

Through you I change gold to iron 
And make of paradise a hell; 
In the winding sheet of the clouds

I discover a beloved corpse, 
And on the celestial shores 
I build massive sarcophagi.

Alchemy of Sorrow

One puts all nature into mourning,
One lights her like a flaring sun -- 
What whispers "Burial" to the one
Cries to the other, "Life and Morning."

The unknown Hermes who assists
The role of Midas to reverse,
And makes me by a subtle curse
The saddest of all alchemists -- 

By him, my paradise to hell,
And gold to slag, is changed too well.
The clouds are winding-sheets, and I,

Bidding some dear-loved corpse farewell, 
Along the shore-line of the sky, 
Erect my vast sarcophagi.

Alchimie de la douleur

one lights thee with his flame, another
puts in thee -- Nature! -- all his gloom!
what says to this man: lo! the tomb!
cries: life and splendour! to his brother.

o mage unknown whose powers assist
my art, and whom I always fear,
thou makest me a Midas -- peer
of that most piteous alchemist;

for 'tis through thee I turn my gold
to iron, and in heaven behold
my hell: beneath her cloud-palls I

uncover corpses loved of old;
and where the shores celestial die
I carve vast tombs against the sky.

The Alchemy of Grief

One, Nature! burns and makes thee bright, 
One gives thee weeds to mourn withal; 
And what to one is burial 
Is to the other life and light. 

The unknown Hermes who assists 
And always fills my heart with fear, 
Makes the mighty Midas' peer 
The saddest of the alchemists. 

Through him I make gold changeable 
To dross, and paradise to hell; 
Clouds for its corpse-cloths I descry. 

A stark dead body I love well, 
And in the gleaming fields on high 
I build immense sarcophagi. 

Reflected Horror

From that sky, bizarre and livid, 
Distorted as your destiny, 
What thoughts into your empty soul 
Descend? Answer me, libertine.

-- Insatiably avid 
For the dark and the uncertain, 
I shall not whimper like Ovid 
Chased from his Latin paradise.

Skies torn like the shores of the sea,
You are the mirror of my pride;
Your vast clouds in mourning

Are the black hearses of my dreams, 
And your gleams are the reflection 
Of the Hell which delights my heart.

Sympathetic Horror

From livid skies that, without end, 
As stormy as your future roll, 
What thoughts into your empty soul 
(Answer me, libertine!) descend?

-- Insatiable yet for all 
That turns on darkness, doom, or dice, 
I'll not, like Ovid, mourn my fall, 
Chased from the Latin paradise.

Skies, torn like seacoasts by the storm!
In you I see my pride take form,
And the huge clouds that rush in streams

Are the black hearses of my dreams, 
And your red rays reflect the hell, 
In which my heart is pleased to dwell.

Magnetic Horror

"Beneath this sky, so livid and strange, 
Tormented like thy destiny, 
What thoughts within thy spirit range 
Themselves? -- O libertine reply."

-- With vain desires, for ever torn 
Towards the uncertain, and the vast, 
And yet, like Ovid -- I'll not mourn --
Who from his Roman Heaven was cast. 

O heavens, turbulent as the streams, 
In you I mirror forth my pride! 
Your clouds, which clad in mourning, glide, 

Are the hearses of my dreams, 
And in your illusion lies the hell, 
Wherein my heart delights to dwell. 

The Clock

Impassive clock! Terrifying, sinister god, 
Whose finger threatens us and says: "<i>Remember!</i> 
The quivering Sorrows will soon be shot 
Into your fearful heart, as into a target;

Nebulous pleasure will flee toward the horizon 
Like an actress who disappears into the wings; 
Every instant devours a piece of the pleasure 
Granted to every man for his entire season.

Three thousand six hundred times an hour, Second
Whispers: <i>Remember!</i> -- Immediately
With his insect voice, Now says: I am the Past
And I have sucked out your life with my filthy trunk!

<i>Remember! Souviens-toi,</i> spendthrift! <i>Esto memor!</i>
(My metal throat can speak all languages.)
Minutes, blithesome mortal, are bits of ore
That you must not release without extracting the gold!

Remember, Time is a greedy player 
Who wins without cheating, every round! It's the law. 
The daylight wanes; the night deepens; <i>remember!</i> 
The abyss thirsts always; the water-clock runs low.

Soon will sound the hour when divine Chance, 
When august Virtue, your still virgin wife, 
When even Repentance (the very last of inns!), 
When all will say: Die, old coward! it is too late!"

The Clock

The Clock, calm evil god, that makes us shiver, 
With threatening finger warns us each apart:
<i>"Remember!</i> Soon the vibrant woes will quiver, 
Like arrows in a target, in your heart.

To the horizon Pleasure will take flight 
As flits a vaporous sylphide to the wings. 
Each instant gnaws a crumb of the delight 
That for his season every mortal brings.

Three thousand times and more, each hour, the second 
Whispers <i>'Remember!'</i> Like an insect shrill 
The present chirps, 'With Nevermore I'm reckoned, 
I've pumped your lifeblood with my loathsome bill.'

<i>Remember! Souviens-toi I Esto Memor!</i> 
My brazen windpipe speaks in every tongue. 
Each moment, foolish mortal, is like ore 
From which the precious metal must be wrung.

<i>Remember.</i> Time the gamester (it's the law) 
Wins always, without cheating. Daylight wanes. 
Night deepens. The abyss with gulfy maw 
Thirsts on unsated, while the hour-glass drains.

Sooner or later, now, the time must be 
When Hazard, Virtue (your still-virgin mate), 
Repentance, (your last refuge), or all three -- 
Will tell you, 'Die, old Coward. It's too late!'"

The Clock

Terrible Clock! God without mercy; mighty Power! 
Saying all day, "<i>Remember!</i> Remember and beware: 
There is no arrow of pain but in a tiny hour 
Will make thy heart its target, and stick and vibrate there.

"Toward the horizon all too soon and out of sight 
Vaporous Pleasure, like a sylphide, floats away; 
Each instant swallows up one crumb of that delight 
Accorded to each man for all his mortal day."

The Second says, three thousand six hundred times an hour, 
<i>"Remember!</i> Look, the winged insect Now doth sit 
Upon thy vein, and shrilleth, 'I am Nevermore, 
And I have sucked thy blood; I am flying away with it!'

<i>"Remember! Souviens-toi! Esto memor!</i> -- no tongue
My metal larynx does not speak -- O frivolous man,
These minutes, rich in gold, slide past; thou art not young;
<i>Remember!</i> and wash well the gravel in the pan!

<i>"Remember!</i> Time, the player that need not cheat to win, 
Makes a strong adversary. Is thy game begun? 
Thy game is lost! Day wanes; night waxes. Look within 
The gulf, -- it still is thirsty. The sands are all but run.

"Soon, soon, the hour will strike, when Hazard, he that showed 
A god-like face, when Virtue -- thy bride, but still intact -- 
When even Repentance (oh, last inn along the road!) 
Will say to thee, 'Die, coward. It is too late to act.'"

Landscape

I would, to compose my eclogues chastely, 
Lie down close to the sky like an astrologer, 
And, near the church towers, listen while I dream 
To their solemn anthems borne to me by the wind. 
My chin cupped in both hands, high up in my garret 
I shall see the workshops where they chatter and sing, 
The chimneys, the belfries, those masts of the city, 
And the skies that make one dream of eternity.

It is sweet, through the mist, to see the stars
Appear in the heavens, the lamps in the windows,
The streams of smoke rise in the firmament
And the moon spread out her pale enchantment.
I shall see the springtimes, the summers, the autumns;
And when winter comes with its monotonous snow,
I shall close all the shutters and draw all the drapes
So I can build at night my fairy palaces.
Then I shall dream of pale blue horizons, gardens,
Fountains weeping into alabaster basins,
Of kisses, of birds singing morning and evening,
And of all that is most childlike in the Idyl.
Riot, storming vainly at my window,
Will not make me raise my head from my desk, 
For I shall be plunged in the voluptuousness 
Of evoking the Springtime with my will alone, 
Of drawing forth a sun from my heart, and making 
Of my burning thoughts a warm atmosphere.

The Landscape

More chasteness to my eclogues it would give, 
Sky-high, like old astrologers to live, 
A neighbour of the belfries: and to hear 
Their solemn hymns along the winds career. 
High in my attic, chin in hand, I'd swing 
And watch the workshops as they roar and sing, 
The city's masts -- each steeple, tower, and flue -- 
And skies that bring eternity to view.

Sweet, through the mist, to see illumed again 
Stars through the azure, lamps behind the pane, 
Rivers of carbon irrigate the sky, 
And the pale moon pour magic from on high. 
I'd watch three seasons passing by, and then 
When winter came with dreary snows, I'd pen 
Myself between closed shutters, bolts, and doors, 
And build my fairy palaces indoors.

A dream of blue horizons I would garble 
With thoughts of fountains weeping on to marble, 
Of gardens, kisses, birds that ceaseless sing, 
And all the Idyll holds of childhood's spring. 
The riots, brawling past my window-pane, 
From off my desk would not divert my brain. 
Because I would be plunged in pleasure still, 
Conjuring up the Springtime with my will, 
And forcing sunshine from my heart to form, 
Of burning thoughts, an atmosphere that's warm.

Landscape

I want to write a book of chaste and simple verse, 
Sleep in an attic, like the old astrologers, 
Up near the sky, and hear upon the morning air
The tolling of the bells. I want to sit and stare, 
My chin in my two hands, out on the humming shops, 
The weathervanes, the chimneys, and the steepletops 
That rise like masts above the city, straight and tall, 
And the mysterious big heavens over all.

I want to watch the blue mist of the night come on, 
The windows and the stars illumined, one by one, 
The rivers of dark smoke pour upward lazily, 
And the moon rise and turn them silver. I shall see 
The springs, the summers, and the autumns slowly pass; 
And when old Winter puts his blank face to the glass, 
I shall close all my shutters, pull the curtains tight, 
And build me stately palaces by candlelight.

And I shall dream of luxuries beyond surmise,
Gardens that are a stairway into azure skies,
Fountains that weep in alabaster, birds that sing 
All day -- of every childish and idyllic thing. 
A revolution thundering in the street below 
Will never lure me from my task, I shall be so 
Lost in that quiet ecstasy, the keenest still, 
Of calling back the springtime at my own free will, 
Of feeling a sun rise within me, fierce and hot, 
And make a whole bright landscape of my burning thought.

A Landscape

I would, when I compose my solemn verse,
Sleep near the heaven as do astrologers,
Near the high bells, and with a dreaming mind
Hear their calm hymns blown to me on the wind.

Out of my tower, with chin upon my hands,
I'll watch the singing, babbling human bands;
And see clock-towers like spars against the sky,
And heavens that bring thoughts of eternity;

And softly, through the mist, will watch the birth
Of stars in heaven and lamplight on the earth;
The threads of smoke that rise above the town;
The moon that pours her pale enchantment down.

Seasons will pass till Autumn fades the rose;
And when comes Winter with his weary snows,
I'll shut the doors and window-casements tight,
And build my faery palace in the night.

Then I will dream of blue horizons deep;
Of gardens where the marble fountains weep;
Of kisses, and of ever-singing birds -- 
A sinless Idyll built of innocent words.

And Trouble, knocking at my window-pane
And at my closet door, shall knock in vain;
I will not heed him with his stealthy tread,
Nor from my reverie uplift my head;

For I will plunge deep in the pleasure still
Of summoning the spring-time with my will,
Drawing the sun out of my heart, and there
With burning thoughts making a summer air.

The Swan

To Victor Hugo

I

Andromache, I think of you! -- That little stream,
That mirror, poor and sad, which glittered long ago
With the vast majesty of your widow's grieving,
That false Simois swollen by your tears,

Suddenly made fruitful my teeming memory, 
As I walked across the new Carrousel.
-- Old Paris is no more (the form of a city 
Changes more quickly, alas! than the human heart);

I see only in memory that camp of stalls, 
Those piles of shafts, of rough hewn cornices, the grass, 
The huge stone blocks stained green in puddles of water, 
And in the windows shine the jumbled bric-a-brac.

Once a menagerie was set up there;
There, one morning, at the hour when Labor awakens,
Beneath the clear, cold sky when the dismal hubbub
Of street-cleaners and scavengers breaks the silence,

I saw a swan that had escaped from his cage,
That stroked the dry pavement with his webbed feet
And dragged his white plumage over the uneven ground.
Beside a dry gutter the bird opened his beak,

Restlessly bathed his wings in the dust
And cried, homesick for his fair native lake:
"Rain, when will you fall? Thunder, when will you roll?"
I see that hapless bird, that strange and fatal myth,

Toward the sky at times, like the man in Ovid, 
Toward the ironic, cruelly blue sky, 
Stretch his avid head upon his quivering neck, 
As if he were reproaching God!

II

Paris changes! but naught in my melancholy 
Has stirred! New palaces, scaffolding, blocks of stone, 
Old quarters, all become for me an allegory, 
And my dear memories are heavier than rocks.

So, before the Louvre, an image oppresses me:
I think of my great swan with his crazy motions,
Ridiculous, sublime, like a man in exile,
Relentlessly gnawed by longing! and then of you,

Andromache, base chattel, fallen from the embrace
Of a mighty husband into the hands of proud Pyrrhus,
Standing bowed in rapture before an empty tomb,
Widow of Hector, alas! and wife of Helenus!

I think of the negress, wasted and consumptive, 
Trudging through muddy streets, seeking with a fixed gaze 
The absent coco-palms of splendid Africa 
Behind the immense wall of mist;

Of whoever has lost that which is never found 
Again! Never! Of those who deeply drink of tears 
And suckle Pain as they would suck the good she-wolf!
Of the puny orphans withering like flowers!

Thus in the dim forest to which my soul withdraws,
An ancient memory sounds loud the hunting horn!
I think of the sailors forgotten on some isle,
-- Of the captives, of the vanquished!...of many others too!

The Swan

To Victor Hugo

Andromache! -- This shallow stream, the brief
Mirror you once so grandly overcharged
With your vast majesty of widowed grief,
This lying Simois your tears enlarged,

Evoked your name, and made me think of you, 
As I was crossing the new Carrousel.
-- Old Paris is no more (cities renew, 
Quicker than human hearts, their changing spell).

In mind I see that camp of huts, the muddle 
Of rough-hewn roofs and leaning shafts for miles, 
The grass, green logs stagnating in the puddle, 
Where bric-a-brac lay glittering in piles.

Once a menagerie parked there. 
And there it chanced one morning, when from slumber freed, 
Labour stands up, and Transport through still air 
Rumbles its sombre hurricane of speed, -- 

A swan escaped its cage: and as its feet 
With finny palms on the harsh pavement scraped, 
Trailing white plumage on the stony street, 
In the dry gutter for fresh water gaped.

Nervously bathing in the dust, in wonder 
It asked, remembering its native stream, 
"When will the rain come down? When roll the thunder?" 
I see it now, strange myth and fatal theme!

Sometimes, like Ovid's wretch, towards the sky 
(Ironically blue with cruel smile) 
Its neck, convulsive, reared its head on high 
As though it were its Maker to revile.

II

Paris has changed, but in my grief no change. 
New palaces and scaffoldings and blocks, 
To me, are allegories, nothing strange. 
My memories are heavier than rocks.

Passing the Louvre, one image makes me sad:
That swan, like other exiles that we knew,
Grandly absurd, with gestures of the mad,
Gnawed by one craving! -- Then I think of you,

Who fell from your great husband's arms, to be 
A beast of freight for Pyrrhus, and for life, 
Bowed by an empty tomb in ecstasy -- 
Great Hector's widow! Helenus's wife!

I think, too, of the starved and phthisic negress 
Tramping the mud, who seeks, with haggard eye, 
The palms of Africa, and for some egress 
Out of this great black wall of foggy sky:

Of those who've lost what they cannot recover: 
Of those who slake with tears their lonely hours 
And milk the she-wolf, Sorrow, for their mother: 
And skinny orphans withering like flowers.

So in the forest of my soul's exile, 
Remembrance winds his horn as on he rides. 
I think of sailors stranded on an isle, 
Captives, and slaves -- and many more besides.

Le Cygne

I

Andromache, of thee I think! and of
the dreary streamlet where, through exiled years,
shone the vast grandeur of thy widow's love,
that false Simois brimmed with royal tears

poured like the Nile across my memory strange,
as past the Louvre new I strolled, apart.
-- Old Paris is no more (for cities change
-- alas! -- more quickly than a mortal's heart);

only my memory sees the capitals,
the shafts unfinished once, in pools of rain,
the slimy marble blocks, weeds, market-stalls
with old brass gleaming through each dusty pane.

that corner houses a whole menagerie once;
and here one day I saw, when 'neath the fair
cold heavens, Toil awoke, and over the stones
the storm of traffic rent the silent air,

a swan which from its cage had made escape
patting the torrid blocks with webby feet,
trailing great plumes of snow, while beak agape
fumbled for water in the parching street;

wildly it plunged its wings in dust again,
mourning its native lake, and seemed to shrill:
"lightning, when comest thou? and when, the rain?"
strange symbol! wretched bird, I see it still,

up to the sky, like Ovid's fool accurst,
up to the cruelly blue ironic sky
raising its neck convulsed and beak athirst,
as though reproaching God in each mad cry.

II

towns change... but in my melancholy naught
has moved at all! new portals, ladders, blocks,
old alleys -- all become symbolic thought,
in me, loved memories turn to moveless rocks.

so, crushing me, the Louvre gates recall
my huge white swan, insane with agony,
comic, sublime, like exiles one and all
by truceless cravings torn! I think of thee

Andromache, a slave apportioned, whom
proud Pyrrhus took from hands more glorious,
in ecstasy bent o'er an empty tomb;
great Hector's widow, wed to Helenus!

I think of thee, consumptive Nubian,
wading the mire, wan-eyed girl, agog
to find the absent palms of proud Soudan
behind the boundless rampart of the fog;

I think of all who lose the boons we find
no more! no more! who feed on tears and cling
to the good she-wolf Grief, whose tears are kind!
-- of orphans gaunt like flowers withering!

thus, in the jungle of my soul's exile,
old memories wind a horn I've heard before!
I think of sailors wrecked on some lost isle,
of prisoners, captives!... and many more!

The Swan

I

Andromache, I think of you! The stream,
The poor, sad mirror where in bygone days
Shone all the majesty of your widowed grief,
The lying Simoïs flooded by your tears,
Made all my fertile memory blossom forth
As I passed by the new-built Carrousel.
Old Paris is no more (a town, alas,
Changes more quickly than man's heart may change);
Yet in my mind I still can see the booths;
The heaps of brick and rough-hewn capitals;
The grass; the stones all over-green with moss;
The debris, and the square-set heaps of tiles.

There a menagerie was once outspread;
And there I saw, one morning at the hour
When toil awakes beneath the cold, clear sky,
And the road roars upon the silent air,
A swan who had escaped his cage, and walked
On the dry pavement with his webby feet,
And trailed his spotless plumage on the ground.
And near a waterless stream the piteous swan
Opened his beak, and bathing in the dust
His nervous wings, he cried (his heart the while
Filled with a vision of his own fair lake):
"O water, when then wilt thou come in rain?
Lightning, when wilt thou glitter?"
Sometimes yet
I see the hapless bird -- strange, fatal myth -- 
Like him that Ovid writes of, lifting up
Unto the cruelly blue, ironic heavens,
With stretched, convulsive neck a thirsty face,
As though he sent reproaches up to God!

II

Paris may change; my melancholy is fixed.
New palaces, and scaffoldings, and blocks,
And suburbs old, are symbols all to me
Whose memories are as heavy as a stone.
And so, before the Louvre, to vex my soul,
The image came of my majestic swan
With his mad gestures, foolish and sublime,
As of an exile whom one great desire
Gnaws with no truce. And then I thought of you,
Andromache! torn from your hero's arms;
Beneath the hand of Pyrrhus in his pride;
Bent o'er an empty tomb in ecstasy;
Widow of Hector -- wife of Helenus!
And of the negress, wan and phthisical,
Tramping the mud, and with her haggard eyes
Seeking beyond the mighty walls of fog
The absent palm-trees of proud Africa;
Of all who lose that which they never find;
Of all who drink of tears; all whom grey grief
Gives suck to as the kindly wolf gave suck;
Of meagre orphans who like blossoms fade.
And one old Memory like a crying horn
Sounds through the forest where my soul is lost....
I think of sailors on some isle forgotten;
Of captives; vanquished ... and of many more.

The Seven Old Men

To Victor Hugo

Teeming, swarming city, city full of dreams, 
Where specters in broad day accost the passer-by! 
Everywhere mysteries flow like the sap in a tree 
Through the narrow canals of the mighty giant.

One morning, while in a gloomy street the houses,
Whose height was increased by the mist, simulated
The quais of a swollen river, and while
-- A setting that was like the actor's soul -- 

A dirty yellow fog inundated all space, 
I was following, steeling my nerves like a hero, 
Arid arguing with my already weary soul, 
A squalid street shaken by the heavy dump-carts.

Suddenly an old man whose tattered yellow clothes
Were of the same color as the rainy heavens,
And whose aspect would have brought him showers of alms
If his eyes had not gleamed with so much wickedness,

Appeared to me. One would have said his eyes were drenched 
With gall; his look sharpened the winter's chill, 
And his long shaggy beard, like that of Judas, 
Projected from his chin as stiffly as a sword.

He was not bent over, but broken; his back-bone
Made with his legs a perfect right angle,
So that his stick, completing the picture,
Gave him the appearance and clumsy gait

Of a lame quadruped or a three-legged Jew.
He went hobbling along in the snow and the mud
As if he were crushing the dead under his shoes;
Hostile, rather than indifferent to the world,

His likeness followed him: beard, eye, back, stick, tatters, 
No mark distinguished this centenarian twin, 
Who came from the same hell, and these baroque specters 
Were walking with the same gait toward an unknown goal.

Of what infamous plot was I then the object, 
Or what evil chance humiliated me thus? 
For I counted seven times in as many minutes 
That sinister old man who multiplied himself!

Let him who laughs at my disquietude, 
And who is not seized with a fraternal shudder, 
Realize that in spite of such decrepitude 
Those hideous monsters had an eternal look!

Could I, without dying, have regarded the eighth, 
Unrelenting Sosia, ironic and fatal, 
Disgusting Phoenix, son and father of himself?
-- But I turned my back on that hellish procession.

Exasperated like a drunk who sees double, 
I went home; I locked the door, terrified, 
Chilled to the bone and ill, my mind fevered, confused, 
Hurt by that mysterious and absurd happening!

Vainly my reason tried to take the helm;
The frolicsome tempest baffled all its efforts,
And my soul, old sailing barge without masts,
Kept dancing, dancing, on a monstrous, shoreless sea!

The Seven Old Men

To Victor Hugo

Ant-seething city, city full of dreams, 
Where ghosts by daylight tug the passer's sleeve. 
Mystery, like sap, through all its conduit-streams, 
Quickens the dread Colossus that they weave.

One early morning, in the street's sad mud,
Whose houses, by the fog increased in height,
Seemed wharves along a riverside in flood:
When with a scene to match the actor's plight,

Foul yellow mist had filled the whole of space: 
Steeling my nerves to play a hero's part, 
I coaxed my weary soul with me to pace 
The backstreets shaken by each lumbering cart.

A wretch appeared whose tattered, yellow clothing, 
Matching the colour of the raining skies, 
Could make it shower down alms -- but for the loathing 
Malevolence that glittered in his eyes.

The pupils of his eyes, with bile injected, 
Seemed with their glance to make the frost more raw. 
Stiff as a sword, his long red beard projected, 
Like that of Judas, level with his jaw.

He was not bent, but broken, with the spine
Forming a sharp right-angle to the straight,
So that his stick, to finish the design,
Gave him the stature and the crazy gait

Of a three-footed Jew, or crippled hound. 
He plunged his soles into the slush as though 
To crush the dead; and to the world around 
Seemed less of an indifferent than a foe.

His image followed him, (back, stick, and beard 
In nothing differed) spawned from the same hole, 
A centenarian twin. Both spectres steered 
With the same gait to the same unknown goal.

To what foul plot was I exposed? of what 
Humiliating hazard made the jeer? 
For seven times, (I counted) was begot 
This sinister, self multiplying fear!

Let him mark well who laughs at my despair 
With no fraternal shudder in reply...
Those seven loathsome monsters had the air, 
Though rotting through, of what can never die.

Disgusting Phoenix, his own sire and father! 
Could I have watched an eighth instalment spawn 
Ironic, fateful, grim -- nor perished rather? 
But from that hellish cortege I'd withdrawn.

Perplexed as drunkards when their sight is doubled, 
I locked my room, sick, fevered, chilled with fright:
With all my spirit sorely hurt and troubled 
By so ridiculous yet strange a sight.

Vainly my reason for the helm was striving: 
The tempest of my efforts made a scorn. 
My soul like a dismasted wreck went driving 
Over a monstrous sea without a bourn.

The Seven Old Men

City swarming with people, how full you are of dreams! 
Here in broad daylight, surely, the passerby may meet 
A specter, -- be accosted by him! Mystery seems 
To move like a thick sap through every narrow street.

I thought (daybreak, it was, in a sad part of town) 
"These houses look much higher in the fog!" -- they stood 
Like two gray quays between which a muddy stream flows down; 
The setting of the play matched well the actor's mood.

All space became a dirty yellow fog; I tried 
To fight it off; I railed at my poor soul, whose feet, 
Weary already, dragged and stumbled at my side. 
Big wagons, bound for market, began to shake the street.

Suddenly there beside me an old man -- all in holes
His garments were, and yellow, like the murky skies,
A sight to wring a rain of coins from kindly souls,
Save for a certain malice gleaming in his eyes,

Appeared. You would have said those eyeballs, without doubt, 
Were steeped in bile -- they sharpened the sleet they looked upon. 
His beard, with its long hairs, stiff as a sword stood out 
Before him, as the beard of Judas must have done.

He stooped so when he walked, his spine seemed not so much
Bending as broken, -- truly, his leg with his backbone
Made a right angle; and his stick, the finishing touch,
Gave him the awkward gait -- now rearing, now half-thrown -- 

Of a three-legged Jew, or some lame quadruped. 
It crossed my mind, as through the mud and snow he went, 
"He walks like someone crushing the faces of the dead. 
Hostile, that's what he is; he's not indifferent."

A man exactly like him followed him. From beard 
To stick they were the same, had risen from the same hell. 
These centenarian twins kept step in rhythmic weird 
Precision, toward some goal which doubtless they knew well.

"What ugly game is this?" I said; "what horseplay's here? 
Am I the butt of knaves, or have I lost my mind?" 
For seven times -- I counted them -- there did appear 
This sinister form, which passed, yet left itself behind.

Let anyone who smiles at my distress, whose heart
No sympathetic horror grips, consider well:
Though these old monsters seemed about to fall apart,
Somehow I knew they were eternal, -- l could tell!

Had I beheld one more of them, I think indeed 
I should have died! -- for each, in some disgusting way, 
Had spawned himself, lewd Phoenix, from his own foul seed, 
Was his own son and father, -- I fled -- I could not stay.

Angry, bewildered, like a drunken man by whom
All objects are seen double, I locked my door, and heard
My frozen heart cry out with dread in the hot room, -- 
That what was so mysterious should be so absurd!

My reason fought to gain the bridge and take the helm; 
The tempest thrust it back; and rudderless, unrigged, 
A hull which the waves wash but will not overwhelm, 
My soul upon a shoreless sea of horror jigged.

The Seven Old Men

O swarming city, city full of dreams,
Where in full day the spectre walks and speaks;
Mighty colossus, in your narrow veins
My story flows as flows the rising sap.

One morn, disputing with my tired soul,
And like a hero stiffening all my nerves,
I trod a suburb shaken by the jar
Of rolling wheels, where the fog magnified
The houses either side of that sad street,
So they seemed like two wharves the ebbing flood
Leaves desolate by the river-side. A mist,
Unclean and yellow, inundated space -- 
A scene that would have pleased an actor's soul.
Then suddenly an aged man, whose rags
Were yellow as the rainy sky, whose looks
Should have brought alms in floods upon his head.
Without the misery gleaming in his eye,
Appeared before me; and his pupils seemed
To have been washed with gall; the bitter frost
Sharpened his glance; and from his chin a beard
Sword-stiff and ragged, Judas-like stuck forth.
He was not bent but broken: his backbone
Made a so true right angle with his legs,
That, as he walked, the tapping stick which gave
The finish to the picture, made him seem
Like some infirm and stumbling quadruped
Or a three-legged Jew. Through snow and mud
He walked with troubled and uncertain gait,
As though his sabots trod upon the dead,
Indifferent and hostile to the world.

His double followed him: tatters and stick
And back and eye and beard, all were the same;
Out of the same Hell, indistinguishable,
These centenarian twins, these spectres odd,
Trod the same pace toward some end unknown.
To what fell complot was I then exposed?
Humiliated by what evil chance?
For as the minutes one by one went by
Seven times I saw this sinister old man
Repeat his image there before my eyes!

Let him who smiles at my inquietude,
Who never trembled at a fear like mine,
Know that in their decrepitude's despite
These seven old hideous monsters had the mien
Of beings immortal.

Then, I thought, must I,
Undying, contemplate the awful eighth;
Inexorable, fatal, and ironic double;
Disgusting Phoenix, father of himself
And his own son? In terror then I turned
My back upon the infernal band, and fled
To my own place, and closed my door; distraught
And like a drunkard who sees all things twice,
With feverish troubled spirit, chilly and sick,
Wounded by mystery and absurdity!

In vain my reason tried to cross the bar,
The whirling storm but drove her back again;
And my soul tossed, and tossed, an outworn wreck,
Mastless, upon a monstrous, shoreless sea.

Little Old Women

To Victor Hugo

I

In the sinuous folds of the old capitals, 
Where all, even horror, becomes pleasant, 
I watch, obedient to my fatal whims, 
For singular creatures, decrepit and charming.

These disjointed monsters were women long ago,
Eponine or Lais! Monsters, hunch-backed, broken
Or distorted, let us love them! they still have souls.
Clothed in tattered petticoats and flimsy dresses

They creep, lashed by the iniquitous wind, 
Trembling at the clatter of the omnibuses, 
Each pressing to her side, as if it were a relic, 
A small purse embroidered with rebuses or flowers;

They trot exactly like marionettes;
They drag themselves along like wounded animals,
Or dance, against their will, poor little bells
Pulled constantly by a heartless Demon! Broken

Though they are, they have eyes as piercing as gimlets, 
That shine like those holes in which water sleeps at night; 
They have the divine eyes of little girls 
Who are amazed and laugh at everything that gleams.

-- Have you observed how frequently coffins
For old women are almost as small as a child's?
Clever Death brings to these similar biers
A symbol of a strange and captivating taste,

And when I catch a glimpse of a feeble specter 
Crossing the swarming scene that is Paris, 
It always seems to me that that fragile creature 
Is going quietly toward a second cradle;

Unless, pondering on geometry, 
I try, at the sight of those discordant members, 
To figure how many times the workman changes 
The shape of the boxes where those bodies are laid.

-- Those eyes are wells filled with a million tears, 
Crucibles which a quenched metal spangled...
Those mysterious eyes have invincible charms 
For one whom austere Misfortune has suckled!

II

Vestal in love with the late Frascati;
High priestess of Thalia, whose name is known
To her buried prompter; vanished celebrity
Whom Tivoli sheltered at the peak of her fame,

They all enrapture me; among those frail beings 
There are some who, making honey out of sorrow, 
Have said to Devotion who had lent them his wings: 
"Powerful hippogriff, carry me to the sky!"

One, inured to misfortune by her fatherland, 
Another, overwhelmed with grief by her husband, 
Another, a Madonna transfixed by her child, 
Each could have made a river with her tears!

III

Ah! how many of these women I have followed!
One, among others, at the hour when the sunset
Makes the sky bloody with vermilion wounds,
Pensive, used to sit alone on a bench

To hear one of those concerts rich in brass, 
With which the soldiers sometimes flood our public parks 
On those golden evenings when one feels new life within 
And which inspire heroism in the townsman's heart.

Proud, still erect, feeling she must sit thus,
She thirstily drank in that stirring, martial song;
Her eyes opened at times like the eyes of an old eagle;
Her marble brow seemed to be made for the laurel!

IV

Thus you trudge along, stoical, uncomplaining, 
Amid the confusion of cities full of life, 
Mothers with bleeding hearts, courtesans, saints, 
Whose names in years gone by were on everyone's lips.

O you who were charming or who were glorious, 
None recognizes you! A drunken ruffian 
Passing by insults you with an obscene remark; 
A dirty, nasty child frisks about at your heels.

Wizened shadows, ashamed of existing, 
With bent backs, you timidly keep close to the walls 
And no person greets you, strange destinies! 
Human wreckage, ripe for eternity!

But I, I watch you tenderly from a distance; 
My anxious eyes are fixed on your uncertain steps, 
As if I were your own father; how wonderful!
I taste unknown to you clandestine pleasures:

I see your untried passions come into full bloom;
I live your vanished days, gloomy or filled with light;
My heart multiplied enjoys all of your vices!
My soul is resplendent with all of your virtues!

Ruins! my family! O kindred minds! 
I bid you each evening a solemn farewell! 
Octogenarian Eves, upon whom rests 
God's terrible claw, where will you be tomorrow?

The Little Old Women

To Victor Hugo

I

in sinuous folds of cities old and grim, 
Where all things, even horror, turn to grace, 
I follow, in obedience to my whim, 
Strange, feeble, charming creatures round the place.

These crooked freaks were women in their pride,
Fair Eponine or Lais! Humped and bent,
Love them! Because they still have souls inside.
Under their draughty skirts in tatters rent,

They crawl: a vicious wind their carrion rides; 
From the deep roar of traffic see them cower, 
Pressing like precious relies to their sides 
Some satchel stitched with mottoes or a flower.

They trot like marionettes along the level, 
Or drag themselves like wounded deer, poor crones! 
Or dance, against their will, as if the devil 
Were swinging in the belfry of their bones.

Cracked though they are, their eyes are sharp as drills 
And shine, like pools of water in the night, -- 
The eyes of little girls whom wonder thrills 
To laugh at all that sparkles and is bright.

The coffins of old women very often 
Are near as small as those of children are. 
Wise Death, who makes a symbol of a coffin 
Displays a taste both charming and bizarre.

And when I track some feeble phantom fleeing 
Through Paris's immense ant-swarming Babel, 
I always think that such a fragile being 
Is moving softly to another cradle.

Unless, sometimes, in geometric mood, 
To see the strange deformities they offer, 
I muse how often he who saws the wood 
Must change the shape and outline of the coffer.

Those eyes are wells a million teardrops feed, 
Crucibles spangled by a cooling ore, 
Invincible in charm to all that breed 
Austere Misfortune suckled with her lore.

II

Vestal whom old Frascati could enamour:
Thalia's nun, whose name was only known
To her dead prompter: madcap full of glamour
Whom Tivoli once sheltered as its own -- 

They all elate me. But of these a few, 
Of sorrow having made a honeyed leaven, 
Say to Devotion, "Lend me wings anew, 
O powerful Hippogriff, and fly to heaven."

One for her fatherland a martyr: one 
By her own husband wronged beyond belief: 
And one a pierced Madonna through her son -- 
They all could make a river with their grief.

III

Yes, I have followed them, time and again!
One, I recall, when sunset, like a heart,
Bled through the sky from wounds of ruddy stain,
Pensively sat upon a seat apart,

To listen to the music, rich in metal 
That's played by bands of soldiers in the parks 
On golden, soul-reviving eves, to fettle, 
From meek civilian hearts, heroic sparks.

This one was straight and stiff, in carriage regal, 
She breathed the warrior-music through her teeth, 
Opened her eye like that of an old eagle, 
And bared a forehead moulded for a wreath.

IV

Thus, then, you journey, uncomplaining, stoic
Across the strife of modern cities flung,
Sad mothers, courtesans, or saints heroic,
Whose names of old were heard on every tongue,

You once were grace, and you were glory once. 
None know you now. Derisory advances 
Some drunkard makes you, mixed with worse affronts. 
And on your heels a child-tormentor prances.

But I who watch you tenderly: and measure 
With anxious eye, your weak unsteady gait 
As would a father -- get a secret pleasure 
On your account, as on your steps I wait.

I see your passionate and virgin crazes; 
Sombre or bright, I see your vanished prime; 
My soul, resplendent with your virtue, blazes, 
And revels in your vices and your crimes.

Poor wrecks! My family! Kindred in mind, you 
Receive from me each day my last addresses. 
Eighty-year Eves, will yet tomorrow find you 
On whom the claw of God so fiercely presses?

The Little Old Women

I

Deep in the tortuous folds of ancient towns,
Where all, even horror, to enchantment turns,
I watch, obedient to my fatal mood,
For the decrepit, strange and charming beings,
The dislocated monsters that of old
Were lovely women -- Lais or Eponine!
Hunchbacked and broken, crooked though they be,
Let us still love them, for they still have souls.
They creep along wrapped in their chilly rags,
Beneath the whipping of the wicked wind,
They tremble when an omnibus rolls by,
And at their sides, a relic of the past,
A little flower-embroidered satchel hangs.
They trot about, most like to marionettes;
They drag themselves, as does a wounded beast;
Or dance unwillingly as a clapping bell
Where hangs and swings a demon without pity.
Though they be broken they have piercing eyes,
That shine like pools where water sleeps at night;
The astonished and divine eyes of a child
who laughs at all that glitters in the world.
Have you not seen that most old women's shrouds
Are little like the shroud of a dead child?
Wise Death, in token of his happy whim,
Wraps old and young in one enfolding sheet.
And when I see a phantom, frail and wan,
Traverse the swarming picture that is Paris,
It ever seems as though the delicate thing
Trod with soft steps towards a cradle new.
And then I wonder, seeing the twisted form,
How many times must workmen change the shape
Of boxes where at length such limbs are laid?
These eyes are wells brimmed with a million tears;
Crucibles where the cooling metal pales -- 
Mysterious eyes that are strong charms to him
Whose life-long nurse has been austere Disaster.

II

The love-sick vestal of the old "Frasciti";
Priestess of Thalia, alas! whose name
Only the prompter knows and he is dead;
Bygone celebrities that in bygone days
The Tivoli o'ershadowed in their bloom;
All charm me; yet among these beings frail
Three, turning pain to honey-sweetness, said
To the Devotion that had lent them wings:
"Lift me, O powerful Hippogriffe, to the skies" -- 
One by her country to despair was driven;
One by her husband overwhelmed with grief;
One wounded by her child, Madonna-like;
Each could have made a river with her tears.

III

Oft have I followed one of these old women,
One among others, when the falling sun
Reddened the heavens with a crimson wound -- 
Pensive, apart, she rested on a bench
To hear the brazen music of the band,
Played by the soldiers in the public park
To pour some courage into citizens' hearts,
On golden eves when all the world revives.
Proud and erect she drank the music in,
The lively and the warlike call to arms;
Her eyes blinked like an ancient eagle's eyes;
Her forehead seemed to await the laurel crown!

IV

Thus you do wander, uncomplaining Stoics,
Through all the chaos of the living town:
Mothers with bleeding hearts, saints, courtesans,
Whose names of yore were on the lips of all;
Who were all glory and all grace, and now
None know you; and the brutish drunkard stops,
Insulting you with his derisive love;
And cowardly urchins call behind your back.
Ashamed of living, withered shadows all,
With fear-bowed backs you creep beside the walls,
And none salute you, destined to loneliness!
Refuse of Time ripe for Eternity!
But I, who watch you tenderly afar,
With unquiet eyes on your uncertain steps,
As though I were your father, I -- O wonder! -- 
Unknown to you taste secret, hidden joy.
I see your maiden passions bud and bloom,
Sombre or luminous, and your lost days
Unroll before me while my heart enjoys
All your old vices, and my soul expands
To all the virtues that have once been yours.
Ruined! and my sisters! O congenerate hearts,
Octogenarian Eves o'er whom is stretched
God's awful claw, where will you be to-morrow?

The Blind

Contemplate them, my soul; they are truly frightful! 
Like mannequins; vaguely ridiculous; 
Strange and terrible, like somnambulists; 
Darting, one never knows where, their tenebrous orbs.

Their eyes, from which the divine spark has departed, 
Remain raised to the sky, as if they were looking 
Into space: one never sees them toward the pavement 
Dreamily bend their heavy heads.

Thus they go across the boundless darkness,
That brother of eternal silence. O city!
While about us you sing, laugh, and bellow,

In love with pleasure to the point of cruelty, 
See! I drag along also! but, more dazed than they, 
I say: "What do they seek in Heaven, all those blind?"

The Blind

My soul, survey them, dreadful as they seem. 
Like marionettes, ridiculous they stare. 
Strange as somnambulists that, in their dream, 
Dart shadowy orbs around we know not where.

Their eyes, from which the heavenly spark has flown 
Remain uplifted, as in distant quest, 
Skyward: but never on the paving stone 
Do they pore dreamingly or come to rest.

They traverse thus the illimitable Dark,
Twin of eternal Silence. While the City
May sing around us, bellow, laugh, or bark, -- 

By pleasure blinded even to horror, I, 
Too, drag my way, but, more a thing of pity, 
Ask what the Blind are seeking there on high.

The Blind

Look at them, Soul! They are horrible. Lo! there, 
Like shrunk dwarfs, vaguely ludicrous; yet they keep 
An aspect strange as those who walk in sleep. 
Rolling their darkened orbs one knows not where. 

Their eyes, from which the godlike spark has flown, 
Stare upward at the sky as though to see 
Some far thing; never hang they dreamily 
Those eyes toward the barren pavement-stone. 

Thus cross they the illimitable dark, 
That brother of eternal silence. Mark! 
O frenzied city, as thou roarest by. 

Drunk with thy song and laughter, I too stray 
With crawling feet! but ask, more dull than they, 
"What seek they, all these blind men, in the sky?"

To a Passer-By

The street about me roared with a deafening sound. 
Tall, slender, in heavy mourning, majestic grief, 
A woman passed, with a glittering hand 
Raising, swinging the hem and flounces of her skirt;

Agile and graceful, her leg was like a statue's. 
Tense as in a delirium, I drank 
From her eyes, pale sky where tempests germinate, 
The sweetness that enthralls and the pleasure that kills.

A lightning flash... then night! Fleeting beauty 
By whose glance I was suddenly reborn, 
Will I see you no more before eternity?

Elsewhere, far, far from here! too late! <i>never</i> perhaps!
For I know not where you fled, you know not where I go,
O you whom I would have loved, O you who knew it!

A Passer-by

The deafening street roared on. Full, slim, and grand 
In mourning and majestic grief, passed down 
A woman, lifting with a stately hand 
And swaying the black borders of her gown;

Noble and swift, her leg with statues matching; 
I drank, convulsed, out of her pensive eye, 
A livid sky where hurricanes were hatching, 
Sweetness that charms, and joy that makes one die.

A lighting-flash -- then darkness! Fleeting chance 
Whose look was my rebirth -- a single glance! 
Through endless time shall I not meet with you?

Far off! too late! or never! -- I not knowing
Who you may be, nor you where I am going -- 
You, whom I might have loved, who know it too!

To a Passerby

Around me thundered the deafening noise of the street, 
In mourning apparel, portraying majestic distress, 
With queenly ringers, just lifting the hem of her dress, 
A stately woman passed by with hurrying feet. 

Agile and noble, with limbs of perfect poise. 
Ah, how I drank, thrilled through like a Being insane, 
In her look, a dark sky, from whence springs forth the hurricane, 
There lay but the sweetness that charms, and the joy that destroys. 

A flash -- then the night... O loveliness fugitive! 
Whose glance has so suddenly caused me again to live, 
Shall I not see you again till this life is o'er! 

Elsewhere, far away... too late, perhaps never more, 
For I know not whither you fly, nor you, where I go, 
O soul that I would have loved, and <i>that</i> you know! 

To a Woman Passing By

The deafening road around me roared.
Tall, slim, in deep mourning, making majestic grief,
A woman passed, lifting and swinging
With a pompous gesture the ornamental hem of her garment,

Swift and noble, with statuesque limb.
As for me, I drank, twitching like an old roue,
From her eye, livid sky where the hurricane is born,
The softness that fascinates and the pleasure that kills,

A gleam... then night! O fleeting beauty, 
Your glance has given me sudden rebirth, 
Shall I see you again only in eternity?

Somewhere else, very far from here! Too late! Perhaps never!
For I do not know where you flee, nor you where I am going,
O you whom I would have loved, O you who knew it!

Skeleton with a Spade

I

In the anatomical plates
That lie about on dusty quais
Where many cadaverous books
Sleep like an ancient mummy,

Engravings to which the staidness
And knowledge of some old artist
Have communicated beauty,
Although the subject is gloomy,

One sees, and it makes more complete 
These mysteries full of horror, 
Skinless bodies and skeletons, 
Spading as if they were farmhands.

II

From the soil that you excavate,
Resigned, macabre villagers,
From all the effort of your backs,
Or of your muscles stripped of skin,

Tell me, what singular harvest, 
Convicts torn from cemeteries, 
Do you reap, and of what farmer 
Do you have to fill the barn?

Do you wish (clear, frightful symbol 
Of too cruel a destiny!) 
To show that even in the grave 
None is sure of the promised sleep;

That Annihilation betrays us;
That all, even Death, lies to us,
And that forever and ever,
Alas! we shall be forced perhaps

In some unknown country 
To scrape the hard and stony ground 
And to push a heavy spade in 
With our bare and bleeding feet?

The Skeleton Navy

I

Quaint anatomic plates are sold 
Along the quays in third-hand stalls 
Where tomes cadaverous and old 
Slumber like mummies in their palls.

In them the craftsman's skill combines 
With expert knowledge in a way 
That beautifies these chill designs 
Although the subject's far from gay.

One notes that, consummating these 
Mysterious horrors, God knows how, 
Skeletons and anatomies 
Peel off their skins to delve and plough.

II

Navvies, funereal and resigned,
From the tough ground with which you tussle
With all the effort that can find
Filleted spine or skinless muscle -- 

O grave-snatched convicts, say what strange
Harvest you hope from such a soil
And who the farmer is whose grange
You would replenish with this toil.

Mean you to show (O evil-starred 
Exponents of too stark a doom) 
The promised sleep may yet be barred, 
Even from us, beyond the tomb;

That even extinction may turn traitor,
And Death itself, can be a lie;
And that perhaps, sooner or later,
Forever, when we come to die,

In some strange country, without wages, 
On stubborn outcrops delving holes, 
We'll push a shovel through the ages 
Beneath our flayed and blinding soles?

Skeletons Digging

I

Among the anatomical plates
Displayed along the dusty quays,
Where many a dead book desiccates
Like an old mummy -- among these

Sad diagrams to which the grave
Fantasy and ironic skill
Of some forgotten artist have
Lent a mysterious beauty still,

One sees (for thus mere nerves and bones 
Were rendered life-like through his pains) 
Digging like laborers, skeletons 
And skinless men composed of veins.

II

Out of that stony soil which ye
Unceasingly upturn, with all
The strength of your stripped vertebrae
And fleshless thews -- funereal

Prisoners from the charnel pile! -- 
What do ye look for? Speak. What strange 
Harvest prepare ye all this while? 
What lord has bid you load his grange?

Do ye desire, O symbols clear
And frightful of a doom unguessed,
To demonstrate that even there,
In the deep grave, we have no rest -- 

That we can no more count as friend
Eternity than we can Time,
Death, too, being faithless in the end?
That we shall toil in dust and grime

For ever upon some field of shade, 
And harry the stiff sod, and put 
Over and over to the spade 
A naked and ensanguined foot?

Le Squelette laboureur

I

in anatomic charts, upon
the parapets of dusty quays,
where coffined volumes lie at peace
like mummies dozing in the sun

-- drawings where in the solemn zeal
of dexterous hands long turned to dust,
in things of sadness or disgust
have shown the beauty of the real --

we find -- and then these lexicons
of cryptic horror grow complete! --
spading, like farmers, with their feet,
cadavers flayed and skeletons.

II

say, from the earth ye ransack there,
o patient serfs funereal,
with all your straining backbones, all
the strength of muscles peeled and bare,

tell me, o galley-slaves who moil,
from graves and charnel-houses torn,
whose barn ye hope to fill? what corn
will crown your long mysterious toil?

would ye (a proof in miniature
of some intolerable doom!)
teach us that even in the tomb
our promised sleep is not secure;

that graves, like all things else, are traps,
and nothingness another lie;
and that, although we mortals die,
'twill be our fate at last, perhaps, 

in lands of loneliness complete,
to dig some rocky counterscarp,
pushing a heavy spade and sharp
beneath our naked bleeding feet?

The Skeleton Laborer

<i>Written to the flayed and fleshless figures on an
anatomical chart, from the 19th century French.</i>

Out of the earth at which you spade,
Funereal laborers, tired and done,
Out of your straining naked bone,
Out of your muscles bare and frayed,

Tell me, what harvest do you win?
Slaves snatched from the charnel ground,
Who is the farmer drives this round
To fill his barn? And what your sin?

You, the terrible sign we're shown
Of our destiny's greater dearth,
Wish you to say that in the earth
The promised sleep is never known?

That the end has betrayed us here,
That even death himself has lied?
That though eternity betide,
Alas! we have again to fear

That in some unknown land we'll meet
A knotted earth that needs to be flayed -- 
To drive again the heavy spade
Beneath our bleeding naked feet?

The Dance of Death

To Ernest Christophe

Proud as a living person of her noble stature, 
With her big bouquet, her handkerchief and gloves, 
She has the nonchalance and easy manner 
Of a slender coquette with bizarre ways.

Did one ever see a slimmer waist at a ball? 
Her ostentatious dress in its queenly fullness 
Falls in ample folds over thin feet, tightly pressed 
Into slippers with pompons pretty as flowers.

The swarm of bees that plays along her collar-bones 
Like a lecherous brook that rubs against the rocks 
Modestly protects from cat-calls and jeers 
The funereal charms that she's anxious to hide.

Her deep eye-sockets are empty and dark, 
And her skull, skillfully adorned with flowers, 
Oscillates gently on her fragile vertebrae. 
Charm of a non-existent thing, madly arrayed!

Some, lovers drunken with flesh, will call you 
A caricature; they don't understand 
The marvelous elegance of the human frame. 
You satisfy my fondest taste, tall skeleton!

Do you come to trouble with your potent grimace 
The festival of Life? Or does some old desire 
Still goading your living carcass 
Urge you on, credulous one, toward Pleasure's sabbath?

With the flames of candles, with songs of violins, 
Do you hope to chase away your mocking nightmare, 
And do you come to ask of the flood of orgies 
To cool the hell set ablaze in your heart?

Inexhaustible well of folly and of sins! 
Eternal alembic of ancient suffering! 
Through the curved trellis of your ribs 
I see, still wandering, the insatiable asp.

To tell the truth, I fear your coquetry 
Will not find a reward worthy of its efforts; 
Which of these mortal hearts understands raillery? 
The charms of horror enrapture only the strong!

The abyss of your eyes, full of horrible thoughts, 
Exhales vertigo, and discreet dancers 
Cannot look without bitter nausea 
At the eternal smile of your thirty-two teeth.

Yet who has not clasped a skeleton in his arms, 
Who has not fed upon what belongs to the grave? 
What matters the perfume, the costume or the dress? 
He who shows disgust believes that he is handsome.

Noseless dancer, irresistible whore,
Tell those dancing couples who act so offended:
"Proud darlings, despite the art of make-up
You all smell of death! Skeletons perfumed with musk,

Withered Antinoi, dandies with smooth faces, 
Varnished corpses, hoary-haired Lovclaces, 
The universal swing of the <i>danse macabre</i> 
Sweeps you along into places unknown!

From the Seine's cold quays to the Ganges' burning shores, 
The human troupe skips and swoons with delight, sees not 
In a hole in the ceiling the Angel's trumpet 
Gaping ominously like a black blunderbuss.

In all climes, under every sun, Death admires you 
At your antics, ridiculous Humanity, 
And frequently, like you, scenting herself with myrrh, 
Mingles her irony with your insanity!"

The Dance of Death

To Ernest Christophe

Proud, as a living person, of her height, 
Her scarf and gloves and huge bouquet of roses, 
She shows such nonchalance and ease as might 
A thin coquette excessive in her poses.

Who, at a ball, has seen a form so slim? 
Her sumptuous skirts extravagantly shower 
To a dry foot that, exquisitely trim, 
Her footwear pinches, dainty as a flower.

The frills that rub her collarbone, and feel, 
Like a lascivious rill against a rock, 
The charms she is so anxious to conceal, 
Defend them, too, from ridicule and mock.

Her eyes are formed of emptiness and shade.
Her skull, with flowers so deftly decked about,
Upon her dainty vertebrae is swayed.
Oh what a charm when nullity tricks out!

"Caricature," some might opine, but wrongly,
Whose hearts, too drunk with flesh that runs to waste,
Ignore the grace of what upholds so strongly.
Tall skeleton, you match my dearest taste!

Come you to trouble with your strong grimace, 
The feast of life? Or has some old desire 
Rowelled your living carcase from its place 
And sent you, credulous, to feed its fire?

With tunes of fiddles and the flames of candles, 
Hope you to chase the nightmare far apart, 
Or with a flood of orgies, feasts, and scandals 
To quench the bell that's lighted in your heart?

Exhaustless well of follies and of faults, 
Of the old woe the alembic and the urn, 
Around your trellised ribs, in new assaults, 
I see the insatiable serpent turn.

I fear your coquetry's not worth the strain, 
The prize not worth the effort you prolong. 
Could mortal hearts your railleries explain? 
The joys of horror only charm the strong.

The pits of your dark eyes dread fancies breathe, 
And vertigo. Among the dancers prudent, 
Hope not your sixteen pairs of smiling teeth 
Will ever find a contemplative student.

Yet who's not squeezed a skeleton with passion? 
Nor ravened with his kisses on the meat 
Of charnels. What of costume, scent, or fashion? 
The man who feigns disgust, betrays conceit.

O noseless geisha, unresisted gouge!
Tell these fastidious feigners, from your husk -- 
"Proud fondling fools, in spite of talc and rouge,
You smell of death. Anatomies of musk,

Withered Antinouses, beaux of dunder, 
Corpses in varnish, Lovelaces of bone, 
The dance of death, with universal thunder, 
Is whirling you to places yet unknown!

From Seine to Ganges frolicking about, 
You see not, through a black hole in the ceiling, 
Like a great blunderbus, with funnelled snout, 
The Angel's trumpet, on the point of pealing.

in every clime, Death studies your devices 
And vain contortions, laughable Humanity, 
And oft, like you, perfumes herself with spices 
Mixing her irony with your insanity!"

Danse macabre

proud as a woman of her queenly height,
with huge bouquet and handkerchief and gloves,
she flaunts the grace and nonchalance, tonight,
of gaunt coquettes who play at lady-loves.

could any dancer vaunt a slimmer waist?
her lavish robe in royal fullness flows
in folds upon her dainty ankles, laced
in tufted patterns lovely as a rose

the lace-frill rippling on her bony breast,
like rills caressing rocks in amorous play,
chastely defends from every silly jest
those ghastly charms that must not see the day.

her eyes are darkening voids which open wide;
her skull, with flowers dexterously crowned,
sways on her slender spine from side to side.
o spell of nothingness by folly gowned!

some, lovers of the flesh, perhaps will claim 
thou art a travesty. they do not know
the nameless elegance of the human frame.
tall skeleton, my heart prefers thee so!

doest come to trouble, with thy potent sneer
Life's festival? or does some ancient fire
-- of fool! -- still prick thy living carcass here
making thee seek this Sabbath of Desire?

dost hope, by violins and lights beguiled,
to slay that mocking nightmare of unrest?
art come to urge the orgy's torrent wild
to quench the hell-fire blazing in thy breast?

exhaustless fount of every stupid sin!
alembic of our old, eternal woe!
I see thy ribs, and wandering within,
the sateless asp, still wriggling to and fro.

but, truth to tell, I fear thy coquetry
may find no guerdon for its labours long;
which of these death-doomed hearts can laugh with thee?
nay, horror's wine is only for the strong!

those eyes, deep gulfs where ghastly secrets lurk,
breathe giddiness. no prudent cavaliers
can gaze unsickened on the eternal smirk
that on thy two and thirty teeth appears.

yet, who has not embraced a skeleton?
who on the thought of tombs has never fed?
what means the scent we use, the cloak we don?
lovely ye deem yourselves, who scorn the dead.

o noseless nautch-girl, o resistless trull,
go tell the partner who thy beauty shuns:
"proud minions, though ye rouge each bleaching skull,
all smell of death! o scented skeletons,

worn dandies, shaven fools with stinking breath,
pale varnished corpses, grey decrepit beaux,
the world-wide rhythm of the Dance of Death
is sweeping you to shores no mortal knows!

from Seine to Ganges burnt, where'er we roam,
Death's head is dancing, crazed, incurious
of the Dark Angel's trump which from the dome
is thrust, an evil gaping blunderbuss.

Death ogles thee both here and everywhere,
writhing, ridiculous humanity,
and oft, myrrh-scented too, she comes to share
in irony, thine own insanity!"

The Dance of Death

Carrying bouquet, and handkerchief, and gloves,
Proud of her height as when she lived, she moves
With all the careless and high-stepping grace,
And the extravagant courtesan's thin face.

Was slimmer waist e'er in a ball-room wooed?
Her floating robe, in royal amplitude,
Falls in deep folds around a dry foot, shod
With a bright flower-like shoe that gems the sod.

The swarms that hum about her collar-bones
As the lascivious streams caress the stones,
Conceal from every scornful jest that flies,
Her gloomy beauty; and her fathomless eyes

Are made of shade and void; with flowery sprays
Her skull is wreathed artistically, and sways,
Feeble and weak, on her frail vertebrae.
O charm of nothing decked in folly! they

Who laugh and name you a Caricature,
They see not, they whom flesh and blood allure,
The nameless grace of every bleached, bare bone,
That is most dear to me, tall skeleton!

Come you to trouble with your potent sneer
The feast of Life! or are you driven here,
To Pleasure's Sabbath, by dead lusts that stir
And goad your moving corpse on with a spur?

Or do you hope, when sing the violins,
And the pale candle-flame lights up our sins,
To drive some mocking nightmare far apart,
And cool the flame hell lighted in your heart?

Fathomless well of fault and foolishness!
Eternal alembic of antique distress!
Still o'er the curved, white trellis of your sides
The sateless, wandering serpent curls and glides.

And truth to tell, I fear lest you should find,
Among us here, no lover to your mind;
Which of these hearts beat for the smile you gave?
The charms of horror please none but the brave.

Your eyes' black gulf, where awful broodings stir,
Brings giddiness; the prudent reveller
Sees, while a horror grips him from beneath,
The eternal smile of thirty-two white teeth.

For he who has not folded in his arms
A skeleton, nor fed on graveyard charms,
Reeks not of furbelow, or paint, or scent,
When Horror comes the way that Beauty went.

O irresistible, with fleshless face,
Say to these dancers in their dazzled race:
"Proud lovers with the paint above your bones,
Ye shall taste death, musk-scented skeletons!

Withered Antinous, dandies with plump faces,
Ye varnished cadavers, and grey Lovelaces,
Ye go to lands unknown and void of breath,
Drawn by the rumour of the Dance of Death.

From Seine's cold quays to Ganges' burning stream,
The mortal troupes dance onward in a dream;
They do not see, within the opened sky,
The Angel's sinister trumpet raised on high.

In every clime and under every sun,
Death laughs at ye, mad mortals, as ye run;
And oft perfumes herself with myrrh, like ye;
And mingles with your madness, irony!"

The Love of Lies

When I see you pass by, my indolent darling, 
To the sound of music that the ceiling deadens, 
Pausing in your slow and harmonious movements, 
Turning here and there the boredom of your gaze;

When I study, in the gaslight which colors it,
Your pale forehead, embellished with a morbid charm,
Where the torches of evening kindle a dawn,
And your eyes alluring as a portrait's,

I say within: "How fair she is! How strangely fresh!" 
Huge, massive memory, royal, heavy tower, 
Crowns her; her heart bruised like a peach 
Is ripe like her body for a skillful lover.

Are you the autumn fruit with sovereign taste? 
A funereal urn awaiting a few tears? 
Perfume that makes one dream of distant oases? 
A caressive pillow, a basket of flowers?

I know that there are eyes, most melancholy ones,
In which no precious secrets lie hidden;
Lovely cases without jewels, lockets without relics,
Emptier and deeper than you are, O Heavens!

But is it not enough that you are a semblance 
To gladden a heart that flees from the truth? 
What matter your obtuseness or your indifference? 
Mask or ornament, hail! I adore your beauty.

Love of Lies

Dear indolent, I love to watch you so, 
While on the ceiling break the tunes of dances, 
And hesitant, harmoniously slow, 
You turn the wandering boredom of your glances.

I watch the gas-flares colouring your drawn, 
Pale forehead, which a morbid charm enhances, 
Where evening lamps illuminate a dawn 
In eyes as of a painting that entrances:

And then I say, "She's fair and strangely fresh, 
Whom memory crowns with lofty towers above. 
Her heart is like a peach's murdered flesh, 
Or like her own, most ripe for learned love."

Are you an autumn fruit of sovereign flavour? 
A funeral urn awaiting tearful showers? 
Of far oases the faint, wafted savour? 
A dreamy pillow? or a sheaf of flowers?

I have known deep, sad eyes that yet concealed
No secrets: caskets void of any gem:
Medallions where no sacred charm lay sealed,
Deep as the Skies, but vacuous like them!

It is enough that your appearance flatters, 
Rejoicing one who flies from truth or duty. 
Your listless, cold stupidity -- what matters? 
Hail, mask or curtain, I adore your beauty!

Illusionary Love

When I behold thee wander by, my languorous love, 
To songs of viols which throughout the dome resound, 
Harmonious and stately as thy footsteps move, 
Bestowing forth the languor of thy glance profound. 

When I regard thee, glowing in the gaslight rays, 
Thy pallid brow embellished by a charm obscure, 
Here where the evening torches light the twilight haze, 
Thine eyes attracting me like those of a portraiture, 

I say -- How beautiful she is! how strangely rich! 
A mighty memory, royal and commanding tower, 
A garland: and her heart, bruised like a ruddy peach, 
Is ripe -- like her body for Love's sapient power. 

Art thou, that spicy Autumn-fruit with taste supreme? 
Art thou a funeral vase inviting tears of grief? 
Aroma -- causing one of Eastern wastes to dream;
A downy cushion, bunch of flowers or golden sheaf? 

I know that there are eyes, most melancholy ones, 
Wherein no precious secret deeply hidden lies, 
Resplendent shrines, devoid of relics, sacred stones, 
More empty, more profound than ye yourselves, O skies? 

Yea, does thy semblance, not alone for me suffice, 
To kindle senses which the cruel truth abhor? 
All one to me! thy folly or thy heart of ice, 
Decoy or mask, all hail! thy beauty I adore! 

L'Amour du mensonge

when I behold thee in thy nonchalance,
while from the dome the shards of music fall:
-- thy feet that slowly weave a weary dance
-- thy gaze a wearier flood engulfing all --

and when I watch thy brow so palely wan,
yet haunting in the gaslight's warm disguise,
-- where evening's torches paint the rose of dawn
-- thine eyes that hold me like a portrait's eyes

I cry: o rose bizarre, now bloomed afresh!
for regal memories crown her, towering, vast,
and all her heart's fruit, whose bruised flesh
is, like her body, riped for love at last.

art thou October fruit of sovereign wiles?
art thou an urn of tears for Sorrow's hours?
a fragrance wafting me to slumberous isles,
a roseleaf bed or funeral wreath of flowers?

some eyes are deep as though they always mourned
-- eyes where no secret pearl of sorrow lies:
fair empty caskets by no gems adorned,
profound and bottomless as ye, o skies!

mere seeming this? but if thy seeming be
a balsam in my heart, with truth at war?
dull or indifferent, what were that to me?
hail, mask of art! thy beauty I adore.

Parisian Dream

To Constantin Guys

I

This morning I am still entranced 
By the image, distant and dim, 
Of that awe-inspiring landscape 
Such as no mortal ever saw.

Sleep is full of miracles!
Obeying a curious whim,
I had banned from that spectacle
Irregular vegetation,

And, painter proud of his genius, 
I savored in my picture 
The delightful monotony 
Of water, marble, and metal.

Babel of arcades and stairways,
It was a palace infinite,
Full of basins and of cascades
Falling on dull or burnished gold,

And heavy waterfalls, 
Like curtains of crystal, 
Were hanging, bright and resplendent, 
From ramparts of metal.

Not with trees but with colonnades 
The sleeping ponds were encircled; 
In these mirrors huge naiads 
Admired themselves like women.

Streams of blue water flowed along 
Between rose and green embankments, 
Stretching away millions of leagues 
Toward the end of the universe;

There were indescribable stones
And magic waves; there were
Enormous glaciers bedazzled
By everything they reflected!

Insouciant and taciturn, 
Ganges, in the firmament, 
Poured out the treasure of their urns 
Into chasms made of diamonds.

Architect of my fairyland, 
Whenever it pleased me I made 
A vanquished ocean flow 
Into a tunnel of jewels;

And all, even the color black, 
Seemed polished, bright, iridescent, 
Liquid enchased its own glory 
In the crystallized rays of light.

Moreover, no star, no glimmer 
Of sun, even at the sky's rim, 
Illuminated these marvels 
That burned with a personal fire!

And over these shifting wonders 
Hovered (terrible novelty! 
All for the eye, naught for the ear!) 
The silence of eternity.

II

Opening my eyes full of flames 
I saw my miserable room 
And felt the cursed blade of care 
Sink deep into my heart again;

The clock with its death-like accent 
Was brutally striking noon; 
The sky was pouring down its gloom 
Upon the dismal, torpid world.

Parisian Dream

To Constantin Guys

I

Of the dread landscape that I saw, 
Where human eyes were never set, 
I still am ravished by the awe 
That, vague and distant, haunts me yet.

Sleep is of miracles so fain 
That I (O singular caprice!) 
As being formless, could obtain 
That vegetable life should cease.

A painter, in my genius free, 
I there exulted in the fettle 
Derived from a monotony 
Composed of marble, lymph, and metal.

Babels of stairways and arcades, 
Endless and topless to behold, 
With ponds, and jets, and steep cascades 
Filling receptacles of gold:

Ponderous cataracts there swung 
Like crystal curtains, foaming shawls -- 
Dazzling and glittering they hung 
Suspended from the metal walls.

Not trees, but colonnades, enclosed 
Motionless lakes, besides whose shelves 
Gigantic naiades reposed, 
Like women, gazing at themselves.

Blue sheets of water interlay 
Unnumbered quays of green and rose, 
That stretched a million leagues away 
To where the bounds of space impose.

'Twas formed of unknown stones that blazed 
And magic waves that intersect, 
Where icebergs floated, seeming dazed 
With all they mirror and reflect.

Impassive, cold, and taciturn, 
Great Ganges, through the sky's vast prism, 
Each poured the treasures of its urn
Into a diamond abysm.

Architect of my fairy scene, 
I willed, by wondrous stratagems, 
An ocean, tamed, to pass between 
A tunnel that was made of gems.

There all things, even the colour black, 
Seemed irridescently to play, 
And liquid crystalised its lack 
Of outline in a frozen ray.

No star, no sun could be discerned, 
Even low down, in that vast sky: 
The fire was personal that burned 
To show these marvels to the eye.

Above these moving wonders sheer 
There soared (that such a thing should be!
All for the eye, none for the ear!) 
A silence of eternity.

II

My opening eyes, as red as coal, 
The horror of my lodging met. 
I felt re-entering my soul 
The knife of cares and vain regret.

The clock with brutal accent played 
Funereal chimes. The time was noon 
And heaven covered, with its shade, 
The world, this fatuous balloon!

Parisian Dream

I

That marvelous landscape of my dream -- 
Which no eye knows, nor ever will --  
At moments, wide awake, I seem 
To grasp, and it excites me still.

Sleep, how miraculous you are -- 
A strange caprice had urged my hand 
To banish, as irregular, 
All vegetation from that land;

And, proud of what my art had done, 
I viewed my painting, knew the great 
Intoxicating monotone 
Of marble, water, steel and slate.

Staircases and arcades there were 
In a long labyrinth, which led 
To a vast palace; fountains there 
Were gushing gold, and gushing lead.

And many a heavy cataract 
Hung like a curtain, -- did not fall, 
As water does, but hung, compact, 
Crystal, on many a metal wall.

Tall nymphs with Titan breasts and knees 
Gazed at their images unblurred, 
Where groves of colonnades, not trees, 
Fringed a deep pool where nothing stirred.

Blue sheets of water, left and right, 
Spread between quays of rose and green, 
To the world's end and out of sight, 
And still expanded, though unseen.

Enchanted rivers, those -- with jade 
And jasper were their banks bedecked; 
Enormous mirrors, dazzled, made 
Dizzy by all they did reflect.

And many a Ganges, taciturn 
And heedless, in the vaulted air, 
Poured out the treasure of its urn 
Into a gulf of diamond there.

As architect, it tempted me 
To tame the ocean at its source; 
And this I did, -- I made the sea 
Under a jeweled culvert course.

And every color, even black, 
Became prismatic, polished, bright; 
The liquid gave its glory back 
Mounted in iridescent light.

There was no moon, there was no sun, -- 
For why should sun and moon conspire
To light such prodigies? -- each one
Blazed with its own essential fire!

A silence like eternity 
Prevailed, there was no sound to hear; 
These marvels all were for the eye, 
And there was nothing for the ear.

II

I woke; my mind was bright with flame; 
I saw the cheap and sordid hole 
I live in, and my cares all came 
Burrowing back into my soul.

Brutally the twelve strokes of noon 
Against my naked ear were hurled; 
And a gray sky was drizzling down 
Upon this sad, lethargic world.

The End of the Day

Under a pallid light, noisy,
Impudent Life runs and dances,
Twists and turns, for no good reason
So, as soon as voluptuous

Night rises from the horizon, 
Assuaging all, even hunger, 
Effacing all, even shame, 
The Poet says to himself: "At last!

My spirit, like my vertebrae,
Passionately invokes repose;
With a heart full of gloomy dreams,

I shall lie down flat on my back 
And wrap myself in your curtains, 
O refreshing shadows!"

The End of the Day

Under the wan, dejected skies,
Impudent, raucous, full of treason,
This life runs dancing without reason.
Voluptuous night begins to rise,

Appeasing even those who fast,
Ravenous hunger making tame,
And hiding all things, even shame,
Until the Poet says, "At last

My spirit, like my weary spine, 
Can do with slumber, that is certain, 
Sad dreams invade this heart of mine.

I'm off to lie down on my back, 
And roll myself into your curtain, 
Refreshing shadows, dense and black!"

The End of the Day

Under a sallow light
Runs insolent, shrieking Life,
Dancing and twisting capriciously.
Then, as soon as sensual night

Climbs the horizon
Hushing all, even hunger,
Effacng all, even shame,
The Poet says to himself: "At last

My spirit like my bones
Pleads dearly for repose;
My heart is full of melancholy dreams,

And I go and lie on my back
Coiling myself in your curtains,
O restoring darkness!"

The Dream of a Curious Man

To F.N.

Do you know as I do, delectable suffering?
And do you have them say of you: "O! the strange man!"
-- I was going to die. In my soul, full of love,
A peculiar illness; desire mixed with horror,

Anguish and bright hopes; without internal strife. 
The more the fatal hour-glass continued to flow, 
The fiercer and more delightful grew my torture; 
My heart was being torn from this familiar world.

I was like a child eager for the play, 
Hating the curtain as one hates an obstacle...
Finally the cold truth revealed itself:

I had died and was not surprised; the awful dawn 
Enveloped me. -- What! is that all there is to it? 
The curtain had risen and I was still waiting.

Dream of a Curious Person

To F.N.

Have you known such a savoury grief as I? 
Do people say "Strange fellow!," whom you meet?
-- My amorous soul, when I was due to die, 
Felt longing mixed with horror; pain seemed sweet.

Anguish and ardent hope (no factious whim) 
Were mixed: and as the sands of life ran low 
My torture grew delicious yet more grim, 
And of this dear old world would not let go.

I seemed a child, so keen to see the Show 
He feels a deadly hatred of the Curtain...
And then I saw the hard, cold truth for certain.

I felt that dreadful dawn around me grow 
With no surprise or vestige of a thrill. 
The curtain rose -- and I stayed waiting still.

The Voyage

To Maxime du Camp

To a child who is fond of maps and engravings
The universe is the size of his immense hunger.
Ah! how vast is the world in the light of a lamp!
In memory's eyes how small the world is!

One morning we set out, our brains aflame, 
Our hearts full of resentment and bitter desires, 
And we go, following the rhythm of the wave, 
Lulling our infinite on the finite of the seas:

Some, joyful at fleeing a wretched fatherland; 
Others, the horror of their birthplace; a few, 
Astrologers drowned in the eyes of some woman, 
Some tyrannic Circe with dangerous perfumes.

Not to be changed into beasts, they get drunk 
With space, with light, and with fiery skies; 
The ice that bites them, the suns that bronze them, 
Slowly efface the bruise of the kisses.

But the true voyagers are only those who leave 
Just to be leaving; hearts light, like balloons, 
They never turn aside from their fatality 
And without knowing why they always say: "Let's go!"

Those whose desires have the form of the clouds, 
And who, as a raw recruit dreams of the cannon, 
Dream of vast voluptuousness, changing and strange, 
Whose name the human mind has never known!

II

Horror! We imitate the top and bowling ball, 
Their bounding and their waltz; even in our slumber 
Curiosity torments us, rolls us about, 
Like a cruel Angel who lashes suns.

Singular destiny where the goal moves about,
And being nowhere can be anywhere!
Toward which Man, whose hope never grows weary,
Is ever running like a madman to find rest!

Our soul's a three-master seeking Icaria;
A voice resounds upon the bridge: "Keep a sharp eye!"
From aloft a voice, ardent and wild, cries:
"Love... glory... happiness!" Damnation! It's a shoal!

Every small island sighted by the man on watch 
Is the Eldorado promised by Destiny; 
Imagination preparing for her orgy 
Finds but a reef in the light of the dawn.

O the poor lover of imaginary lands! 
Must he be put in irons, thrown into the sea, 
That drunken tar, inventor of Americas, 
Whose mirage makes the abyss more bitter?

Thus the old vagabond tramping through the mire 
Dreams with his nose in the air of brilliant Edens; 
His enchanted eye discovers a Capua 
Wherever a candle lights up a hut.

III

Astonishing voyagers! What splendid stories 
We read in your eyes as deep as the seas! 
Show us the chest of your rich memories, 
Those marvelous jewels, made of ether and stars.

We wish to voyage without steam and without sails! 
To brighten the ennui of our prisons, 
Make your memories, framed in their horizons, 
Pass across our minds stretched like canvasses.

Tell us what you have seen.

IV

"We have seen stars
And waves; we have also seen sandy wastes;
And in spite of many a shock and unforeseen
Disaster, we were often bored, as we are here.

The glory of sunlight upon the purple sea, 
The glory of cities against the setting sun, 
Kindled in our hearts a troubling desire 
To plunge into a sky of alluring colors.

The richest cities, the finest landscapes, 
Never contained the mysterious attraction 
Of the ones that chance fashions from the clouds 
And desire was always making us more avid!

-- Enjoyment fortifies desire. 
Desire, old tree fertilized by pleasure, 
While your bark grows thick and hardens, 
Your branches strive to get closer to the sun!

Will you always grow, tall tree more hardy
Than the cypress? -- However, we have carefully
Gathered a few sketches for your greedy album,
Brothers who think lovely all that comes from afar!

We have bowed to idols with elephantine trunks; 
Thrones studded with luminous jewels; 
Palaces so wrought that their fairly-like splendor 
Would make your bankers have dreams of ruination;

And costumes that intoxicate the eyes; 
Women whose teeth and fingernails are dyed 
And clever mountebanks whom the snake caresses."

V

And then, and then what else?

VI

"O childish minds!

Not to forget the most important thing,
We saw everywhere, without seeking it, 
From the foot to the top of the fatal ladder, 
The wearisome spectacle of immortal sin:

Woman, a base slave, haughty and stupid, 
Adoring herself without laughter or disgust; 
Man, a greedy tyrant, ribald, hard and grasping, 
A slave of the slave, a gutter in the sewer;

The hangman who feels joy and the martyr who sobs, 
The festival that blood flavors and perfumes; 
The poison of power making the despot weak, 
And the people loving the brutalizing whip;

Several religions similar to our own, 
All climbing up to heaven; Saintliness 
Like a dilettante who sprawls in a feather bed, 
Seeking voluptuousness on horsehair and nails;

Prating humanity, drunken with its genius, 
And mad now as it was in former times, 
Crying to God in its furious death-struggle: 
'O my fellow, O my master, may you be damned!'

The less foolish, bold lovers of Madness, 
Fleeing the great flock that Destiny has folded, 
Taking refuge in opium's immensity! 
-- That's the unchanging report of the entire globe."

VII

Bitter is the knowledge one gains from voyaging! 
The world, monotonous and small, today, 
Yesterday, tomorrow, always, shows us our image: 
An oasis of horror in a desert of ennui!

Must one depart? Remain? If you can stay, remain;
Leave, if you must. One runs, another hides
To elude the vigilant, fatal enemy,
Time! There are, alas! those who rove without respite,

Like the Wandering Jew and like the Apostles, 
Whom nothing suffices, neither coach nor vessel, 
To flee this infamous retiary; and others 
Who know how to kill him without leaving their cribs.

And when at last he sets his foot upon our spine, 
We can hope and cry out: Forward! 
Just as in other times we set out for China, 
Our eyes fixed on the open sea, hair in the wind,

We shall embark on the sea of Darkness
With the glad heart of a young traveler.
Do you hear those charming, melancholy voices
Singing: "Come this way! You who wish to eat

The perfumed Lotus! It's here you gather 
The miraculous fruits for which your heart hungers; 
Come and get drunken with the strange sweetness 
Of this eternal afternoon?"

By the familiar accent we know the specter; 
Our Pylades yonder stretch out their arms towards us. 
"To refresh your heart swim to your Electra!" 
Cries she whose knees we kissed in other days.

VIll

O Death, old captain, it is time! let's weigh anchor!
This country wearies us, O Death! Let us set sail!
Though the sea and the sky are black as ink,
Our hearts which you know well are filled with rays of light

Pour out your poison that it may refresh us!
This fire burns our brains so fiercely, we wish to plunge
To the abyss' depths, Heaven or Hell, does it matter?
To the depths of the Unknown to find something new!"

The Voyage

To Maxime du Camp

For children crazed with postcards, prints, and stamps 
All space can scarce suffice their appetite. 
How vast the world seems by the light of lamps, 
But in the eyes of memory how slight!

One morning we set sail, with brains on fire, 
And hearts swelled up with rancorous emotion, 
Balancing, to the rhythm of its lyre, 
Our infinite upon the finite ocean.

Some wish to leave their venal native skies, 
Some flee their birthplace, others change their ways, 
Astrologers who've drowned in Beauty's eyes, 
Tyrannic Circe with the scent that slays.

Not to be changed to beasts, they have their fling 
With space, and splendour, and the burning sky, 
The suns that bronze them and the frosts that sting 
Efface the mark of kisses by and by.

But the true travellers are those who go 
Only to get away: hearts like balloons 
Unballasted, with their own fate aglow, 
Who know not why they fly with the monsoons:

Those whose desires are in the shape of clouds. 
And dream, as raw recruits of shot and shell, 
Of mighty raptures in strange, transient crowds 
Of which no human soul the name can tell.

Il

Horror! We imitate the top and bowl
In swerve and bias. Through our sleep it runs.
It's Curiosity that makes us roll
As the fierce Angel whips the whirling suns.

Singular game! where the goal changes places; 
The winning-post is nowhere, yet all round; 
Where Man tires not of the mad hope he races 
Thinking, some day, that respite will be found.

Our soul's like a three-master, where one hears
A voice that from the bridge would warn all hands.
Another from the foretop madly cheers
"Love, joy, and glory" ... Hell! we're on the sands!

The watchmen think each isle that heaves in view 
An Eldorado, shouting their belief. 
Imagination riots in the crew 
Who in the morning only find a reef.

The fool that dotes on far, chimeric lands -- 
Put him in irons, or feed him to the shark! 
The drunken sailor's visionary lands 
Can only leave the bitter truth more stark.

So some old vagabond, in mud who grovels, 
Dreams, nose in air, of Edens sweet to roam. 
Wherever smoky wicks illumine hovels 
He sees another Capua or Rome.

III

Amazing travellers, what noble stories 
We read in the deep oceans of your gaze!
Show us your memory's casket, and the glories 
Streaming from gems made out of stars and rays!

We, too, would roam without a sail or steam, 
And to combat the boredom of our jail, 
Would stretch, like canvas on our souls, a dream, 
Framed in horizons, of the seas you sail.

What have you seen?

IV

"We have seen stars and waves. 
We have seen sands and shores and oceans too,
In spite of shocks and unexpected graves, 
We have been bored, at times, the same as you.

The solar glories on the violet ocean 
And those of spires that in the sunset rise, 
Lit, in our hearts, a yearning, fierce emotion 
To plunge into those ever-luring skies.

The richest cities and the scenes most proud 
In nature, have no magic to enamour 
Like those which hazard traces in the cloud 
While wistful longing magnifies their glamour.

Enjoyment adds more fuel for desire, 
Old tree, to which all pleasure is manure; 
As the bark hardens, so the boughs shoot higher, 
And nearer to the sun would grow mature.

Tree, will you always flourish, more vivacious 
Than cypress? -- None the less, these views are yours: 
We took some photographs for your voracious 
Album, who only care for distant shores.

We have seen idols elephantine-snouted, 
And thrones with living gems bestarred and pearled, 
And palaces whose riches would have routed 
The dreams of all the bankers in the world.

We have seen wonder-striking robes and dresses, 
Women whose nails and teeth the betel stains 
And jugglers whom the rearing snake caresses."

V 

What then? What then?

VI

"O childish little brains, 
Not to forget the greatest wonder there -- 
We've seen in every country, without searching, 
From top to bottom of the fatal stair 
Immortal sin ubiquitously lurching:

Woman, a vile slave, proud in her stupidity, 
Self-worshipping, without the least disgust: 
Man, greedy, lustful, ruthless in cupidity, 
Slave to a slave, and sewer to her lust:

The torturer's delight, the martyr's sobs, 
The feasts where blood perfumes the giddy rout: 
Power sapping its own tyrants: servile mobs 
In amorous obeisance to the knout:

Some similar religions to our own, 
All climbing skywards: Sanctity who treasures, 
As in his downy couch some dainty drone, i
In horsehair, nails, and whips, his dearest pleasures.

Prating Humanity, with genius raving, 
As mad today as ever from the first, 
Cries in fierce agony, its Maker braving, 
'O God, my Lord and likeness, be thou cursed!'

But those less dull, the lovers of Dementia, 
Fleeing the herd which fate has safe impounded, 
In opium seek for limitless adventure.
-- That's all the record of the globe we rounded."

VII

It's bitter knowledge that one learns from travel. 
The world so small and drab, from day to day, 
The horror of our image will unravel, 
A pool of dread in deserts of dismay.

Must we depart, or stay? Stay if you can.
Go if you must. One runs: another hides
To baffle Time, that fatal foe to man.
And there are runners, whom no rest betides,

Like the Apostles or the Wandering Jew, 
Whom neither ship nor waggon can enable 
To cheat the retiary. But not a few 
Have killed him without stirring from their cradle.

But when he sets his foot upon our nape
We still can hope and cry "Leave all behind!"
As in old times to China we'll escape
With eyes turned seawards, hair that fans the wind,

We'll sail once more upon the sea of Shades
With heart like that of a young sailor beating.
I hear the rich, sad voices of the Trades
Who cry "This Way! all you who would be eating

The scented Lotus. Here it is they range 
The piles of magic fruit. O hungry friend, 
Come here and swoon away into the strange 
Trance of an afternoon that has no end."

In the familiar tones we sense the spectre. 
Our Pylades stretch arms across the seas, 
"To salve your heart, now swim to your Electra" 
She cries, of whom we used to kiss the knees.

VIll

O Death, old Captain, it is time. Weigh anchor!
To sail beyond the doldrums of our days.
Though black as pitch the sea and sky, we hanker
For space; you know our hearts are full of rays.

Pour us your poison to revive our soul! 
It cheers the burning quest that we pursue, 
Careless if Hell or Heaven be our goal, 
Beyond the known world to seek out the New!

The Voyage

I

For the boy playing with his globe and stamps,
the world is equal to his appetite --
how grand the world in the blaze of the lamps,
how petty in tomorrow's small dry light!

One morning we lift anchor, full of brave
prejudices, prospects, ingenuity --
we swing with the velvet swell of the wave,
our infinite is rocked by the fixed sea.

Some wish to fly a cheapness they detest,
others, their cradles' terror -- other stand
with their binoculars on a woman's breast,
reptilian Circe with her junk and wand.

Not to be turned to reptiles, such men daze
themselves with spaces, light, the burning sky;
cold toughens them, they bronze in the sun's blaze
and dry the sores of their debauchery.

But the true voyagers are those who move
simply to move -- like lost balloons! Their heart
is some old motor thudding in one groove.
It says its single phrase, "Let us depart!"

They are like conscripts lusting for the guns;
our sciences have never learned to tag
their projects and designs -- enormous, vague
hopes grease the wheels of these automatons!

II

We imitate, oh horror! tops and bowls
in their eternal waltzing marathon;
even in sleep, our fever whips and rolls -- 
like a black angel flogging the brute sun.

Strange sport! where destination has no place
or name, and may be anywhere we choose --
where man, committed to his endless race,
runs like a madman diving for repose!

Our soul is a three-master seeking port:
a voice from starboard shouts, "We're at the dock!"
Another, more elated, cries from port,
"Here's dancing, gin and girls!" Balls! it's a rock!

The islands sighted by the lookout seem
the El Dorados promised us last night;
imagination wakes from its drugged dream,
sees only ledges in the morning light.

Poor lovers of exotic Indias,
shall we throw you in chains or in the sea?
Sailors discovering new Americas,
who drown in a mirage of agony!

The worn-out sponge, who scuffles through our slums
sees whiskey, paradise and liberty
wherever oil-lamps shine in furnished rooms --
we see Blue Grottoes, Caesar and Capri.

III

Stunningly simple Tourists, your pursuit
is written in the tear-drops in your eyes!
Spread out the packing cases of your loot,
your azure sapphires made of seas and skies!

We want to break the boredom of our jails
and cross the oceans without oars or steam --
give us visions to stretch our minds like sails,
the blue, exotic shoreline of your dream!

Tell us, what have you seen?

IV

"We've seen the stars,
a wave or two -- we've also seen some sand;
although we peer through telescopes and spars,
we're often deadly bored as you on land.

The shine of sunlight on the violet sea,
the roar of cities when the sun goes down;
these stir our hearts with restless energy;
we worship the Indian Ocean where we drown!

No old chateau or shrine besieged by crowds
of crippled pilgrims sets our souls on fire,
as these chance countries gathered from the clouds.
Our hearts are always anxious with desire.

(Desire, that great elm fertilized by lust,
gives its old body, when the heaven warms
its bark that winters and old age encrust;
green branches draw the sun into its arms.

Why are you always growing taller, Tree --
Oh longer-lived than cypress!) Yet we took
one or two sketches for your picture-book,
Brothers who sell your souls for novelty!

We have salaamed to pagan gods with horns,
entered shrines peopled by a galaxy
of Buddhas, Slavic saints, and unicorns,
so rich Rothschild must dream of bankruptcy!

Priests' robes that scattered solid golden flakes,
dancers with tattooed bellies and behinds,
charmers supported by braziers of snakes..."

V

Yes, and what else?

VI

Oh trivial, childish minds!

You've missed the more important things that we
were forced to learn against our will. We've been 
from top to bottom of the ladder, and see
only the pageant of immortal sin:

there women, servile, peacock-tailed, and coarse,
marry for money, and love without disgust
horny, pot-bellied tyrants stuffed on lust,
slaves' slaves -- the sewer in which their gutter pours!

old maids who weep, playboys who live each hour,
state banquets loaded with hot sauces, blood and trash,
ministers sterilized by dreams of power,
workers who love their brutalizing lash;

and everywhere religions like our own
all storming heaven, propped by saints who reign
like sybarites on beds of nails and frown --
all searching for some orgiastic pain!

Many, self-drunk, are lying in the mud --
mad now, as they have always been, they roll
in torment screaming to the throne of God:
"My image and my lord, I hate your soul!"

And others, dedicated without hope,
flee the dull herd -- each locked in his own world
hides in his ivory-tower of art and dope --
this is the daily news from the whole world!

VII

How sour the knowledge travellers bring away!
The world's monotonous and small; we see
ourselves today, tomorrow, yesterday,
an oasis of horror in a desert of ennui!

Shall we move or rest? Rest, if you can rest;
move if you must. One runs, but others drop
and trick their vigilant antagonist.
Time is a runner who can never stop,

the Wandering Jew or Christ's Apostles. Yet
nothing's enough; no knife goes through the ribs
of this retarius throwing out his net;
others can kill and never leave their cribs.

And even when Time's heel is on our throat
we still can hope, still cry, "On, on, let's go!"
Just as we once took passage on the boat
for China, shivering as we felt the blow,

so we now set our sails for the Dead Sea,
light-hearted as the youngest voyager.
If you look seaward, Traveller, you will see
a spectre rise and hear it sing, "Stop, here,

and eat my lotus-flowers, here's where they're sold.
Here are the fabulous fruits; look, my boughs bend;
eat yourself sick on knowledge. Here we hold
time in our hands, it never has to end."

We know the accents of this ghost by heart;
our comrade spreads his arms across the seas;
"On, on, Orestes. Sail and feast your heart --
here's Clytemnestra." Once we kissed her knees.

VIII

It's time, Old Captain, lift anchor, sink!
The land rots; we shall sail into the night;
if now the sky and sea are black as ink
our hearts, as you must know, are filled with light.

Only when we drink poison are we well --
we want, this fire so burns our brain tissue,
to drown in the abyss -- heaven or hell,
who cares? Through the unknown, we'll find the <i>new.</i>

Travel

I

The child, in love with globes and maps of foreign parts, 
Finds in the universe no dearth and no defect. 
How big the world is, seen by lamplight on his charts! 
How very small the world is, viewed in retrospect.

Some morning we start out; we have a grudge, we itch 
To hurt someone, get even, -- whatever the cause may be, 
Here we are, leaning to the vessel's roll and pitch, 
Cradling our infinite upon the finite sea:

People who think their country shameful, who despise 
Its politics, are here; and men who hate their home; 
Astrologers, who read the stars in women's eyes 
Till nearly drowned, stand by the rail and watch the foam;

Men who must run from Circe, or be changed to swine, 
Go tramping round the deck, drunken with light and air, 
Thinking that wind and sun and spray that tastes of brine 
Can clean the lips of kisses, blow perfume from the hair.

But the true travelers are those who leave a port 
Just to be leaving; hearts light as balloons, they cry, 
"Come on! There's a ship sailing! Hurry! Time's getting short!" 
And pack a bag and board her, -- and could not tell you why.

Those whose desires assume the shape of mist or cloud; 
Who long for, as the raw recruit longs for his gun, 
Voluptuousness immense and changing, by the crowd 
Unguessed, and never known by name to anyone.

II

So, like a top, spinning and waltzing horribly, 
Or bouncing like a ball, we go, -- even in profound 
Slumber tormented, rolled by Curiosity 
Like hoops, as some hard Angel whips the suns around.

Bizarre phenomenon, this goal that changes place! -- 
And, being nowhere, can be any port of call!
Where Man, whose hope is never out of breath, will race
Madly, to find repose, just anywhere at all!

Our soul before the wind sails on, Utopia-bound;
A voice calls from the deck, "What's that ahead there? -- land?"
A voice from the dark crow's-nest -- wild, fanatic sound -- 
Shouts "Happiness! Glory! Love!" -- it's just a bank of sand!

Each little island sighted by the watch at night 
Becomes an Eldorado, is in his belief 
The Promised Land; Imagination soars; despite 
The fact that every dawn reveals a barren reef.

Poor fellow, sick with love for that which never was! 
Put him in irons -- must we? -- throw him overboard? 
Mad, drunken tar, inventor of Americas...
Which, fading, make the void more bitter, more abhorred.

So the old trudging tramp, befouled by muck and mud, 
Ever before his eyes keeps Paradise in sight, 
And sniffs with nose in air a steaming Lotus bud, 
Wherever humble people sup by candlelight.

III

Astonishing, you are, you travelers, -- your eyes
Are deep as the sea's self; what stories they withhold!
Open for us the chest of your rich memories!
Show us those treasures, wrought of meteoric gold!

We'd like, though not by steam or sail, to travel, too!
Brighten our prisons, please! Our days are all the same!
Paint on our spirits, stretched like canvases for you,
Your memories, that have horizons for their frame!

Tell us, what have you seen?

IV

"What have we seen?  -- oh, well, 
We have seen waves, seen stars, seen quite a bit of sand; 
We have been shipwrecked once or twice; but, truth to tell, 
It's just as dull as here in any foreign land.

The glory of the sun upon the violet sea, 
The glory of the castles in the setting sun, 
Saddened us, made us restless, made us long to be 
Under some magic sky, some unfamiliar one.

Truly, the finest cities, the most famous views, 
Were never so attractive or mysterious 
As those we saw in clouds. But it was all no use, 
We had to keep on going -- that's the way with us.

-- Fulfillment only adds fresh fuel to the blaze. 
(Desire! -- old tree that pasture on pleasure and grow fat, 
Your bark grows harder, thicker, with the passing days, 
But you are set to reach the sun, for all of that!

Shall you grow on for ever, tall tree -- -must you outdo 
The cypress?) Still, we have collected, we may say, 
For your voracious album, with care, a sketch or two, 
Brothers, to whom all's fine that comes from far away.

We have bowed down to bestial idols; we have seen 
Baldaquined thrones inlaid with every kind of gem; 
Palaces, silver pillars with marble lace between -- 
Ruinous for your bankers even to dream of them -- ;

Processions, coronations, -- such costumes as we lack
Tongue to describe -- seen cobras dance, and watched them kiss
The	juggler's mouth; seen women with nails and teeth stained black."

V

And then? -- and then?

VI

"You childrenI! Do you want more of this?

Well, then, and most impressive of all: you cannot go 
Anywhere, and not witness -- it's thrust before your eyes -- 
On every rung of the ladder, the high as well as the low,
The tedious spectacle of sin-that-never-dies.

Woman, vile slave, adoring herself, ridiculous 
And unaware of it, too stupid and too vain; 
And man, the pompous tyrant, greedy, cupidinous 
And hard, slave of a slave, and gutter into the drain.

The headsman happy in his work, the victim's shriek; 
Banquets where blood has peppered the pot, perfumed the fruits; 
Poison of too much power making the despot weak; 
The people all in love with the whip which keeps them brutes;

Divers religions, all quite similar to ours, 
Each promising salvation and life; Saints everywhere, 
Who might as well be wallowing on feather beds and flowers 
As getting so much pleasure from those hair shirts they wear.

Humanity, still talking too much, drunken and proud
As ever of its talents, to mighty God on high
In anguish and in furious wrath shouting aloud,
'Master, made in my image! I curse Thee! Mayst Thou die!'

Not all, of course, are quite such nit-wits; there are some 
Who, sickened by the norm, and paying serious court 
To Madness, seeking refuge, turn to opium. 
We've been around the world; and this is our report."

VII

Bitter the knowledge gained from travel... What am I?
The small monotonous world reflects me everywhere:
Yesterday, now, tomorrow, for ever -- in a dry
Desert of boredom, an oasis of despair!

Shall I go on?  -- stay here? Stay here, exhausted man!
Yet, if you must, go on -- keep under cover -- flee -- 
Try to outwit the watchful enemy if you can -- 
Sepulchral Time! Alas, how many there must be

Constrained like the apostles, like the wandering Jew, 
To journey without respite over dust and foam 
To dodge the net of Time! -- and there are others, who 
Have quietly killed him, never having stirred from home.

Yet, when his foot is on our spine, one hope at least
Remains: wriggle from under! Onward! The untrod track!
Just as we once set forth for China and points east,
Wide eyes on the wide sea, and hair blown stiffly back,

We shall embark upon the Sea of Shadows, gay 
As a young passenger on his first voyage out... 
What are those sweet, funereal voices? "Come this way, 
All ye that are in trouble! -- all ye that are in doubt!

"Ye that would drink of Lethe and eat of Lotus-flowers, 
Here are miraculous fruits! -- here, harvested, are piled 
All things the heart has missed! Drink, through the long, sweet hours 
Of that clear afternoon never by dusk defiled!"

We know this ghost -- those accents! -- Pylades! comforter 
And friend! -- his arms outstretched! -- ah, and this ghost we know, 
That calls, "I am Electra! Come!  -- the voice of her 
Whose lost, beloved knees we kissed so long ago.

VIII

Oh, Death, old captain, hoist the anchor! Come, cast off!
We've seen this country, Death! We're sick of it! Let's go! 
The sky is black; black is the curling crest, the trough 
Of the deep wave; yet crowd the sail on, even so!

Pour us your poison wine that makes us feel like gods!
Our brains are burning up! -- there's nothing left to do
But plunge into the void! -- hell? heaven? -- what's the odds?
We're bound for the Unknown, in search of something new!

Le Voyage

... the traveller finds the earth a bitter school!
a dwindled waste, which boredom amplifies!
where trite oases from each muddy pool
one thing reflect: his horror-haunted eyes!

must we depart or stay? if needs be, go;
stay if ye can. One runs, another hides
to cheat that vigilant, remorseless foe,
old Time! and runners tireless, besides,

like the Apostles and the Wandering Jew,
have found no courser swift enough to baulk
that monster with his net, whom others knew
how to destroy before they learned to walk.

but when at last It stands upon our throats,
then we can shout exulting: forward now!
as once to Asian shores we launched our boats, 
with wind-blown hair and seaward-gazing brow,

we shall push off upon Night's shadowy Sea,
blithely as one embarking when a boy;
o soft funereal voices calling thee,
hark to their chant: "come, ye who would enjoy

the fragrant sorcery of the lotus-flower!
come! with the long-craved fruit ye shall commune,
drunk with the sweetness and the drowsy power
of this enchanted endless afternoon!"

we know the phantom by its old behest;
yonder our mates hold beckoning arms toward ours,
"come, cool thy heart on my refreshing breast!"
cries she whose knees we kissed in happier hours.

...


cast off, old Captain Death! the time has come!
we hate this weary shore and would depart!
though sea and sky are drowned in murky gloom,
thy beckoning flames blaze high in every heart!

pour out, to comfort us, thy poison-brew!
so burnt our souls with fires implacable,
into the Pit unplumbed, to find the New,
we'd plunge, nor care if it were Heaven nor Hell!

(The original publication only includes this portion of the poem.)

The Voyage

I

The world is equal to the child's desire
Who plays with pictures by his nursery fire -- 
How vast the world by lamplight seems! How small
When memory's eyes look back, remembering all! -- 

One morning we set forth with thoughts aflame,
Or heart o'erladen with desire or shame;
And cradle, to the song of surge and breeze,
Our own infinity on the finite seas.

Some flee the memory of their childhood's home;
And others flee their fatherland; and some,
Star-gazers drowned within a woman's eyes,
Flee from the tyrant Circe's witcheries;

And, lest they still be changed to beasts, take flight
For the embrasured heavens, and space, and light,
Till one by one the stains her kisses made
In biting cold and burning sunlight fade.

But the true voyagers are they who part
From all they love because a wandering heart
Drives them to fly the Fate they cannot fly;
Whose call is ever "On!" -- they know not why.

Their thoughts are like the clouds that veil a star
They dream of change as warriors dream of war;
And strange wild wishes never twice the same:
Desires no mortal man can give a name.

II

We are like whirling tops and rolling balls -- 
For even when the sleepy night-time falls,
Old Curiosity still thrusts us on,
Like the cruel Angel who goads forth the sun.

The end of fate fades ever through the air,
And, being nowhere, may be anywhere
Where a man runs, hope waking in his breast,
For ever like a madman, seeking rest.

Our souls are wandering ships outwearied;
And one upon the bridge asks: "What's ahead?"
The topman's voice with an exultant sound
Cries: "Love and Glory!" -- then we run aground.

Each isle the pilot signals when 'tis late,
Is El Dorado, promised us by fate -- 
Imagination, spite of her belief,
Finds, in the light of dawn, a barren reef.

Oh the poor seeker after lands that flee!
Shall we not bind and cast into the sea
This drunken sailor whose ecstatic mood
Makes bitterer still the water's weary flood?

Such is an old tramp wandering in the mire,
Dreaming the paradise of his own desire,
Discovering cities of enchanted sleep
Where'er the light shines on a rubbish heap.

III

Strange voyagers, what tales of noble deeds
Deep in your dim sea-weary eyes one reads!
Open the casket where your memories are,
And show each jewel, fashioned from a star;

For I would travel without sail or wind,
And so, to lift the sorrow from my mind,
Let your long memories of sea-days far fled
Pass o'er my spirit like a sail outspread.

What have you seen?

IV

"We have seen waves and stars,
And lost sea-beaches, and known many wars,
And notwithstanding war and hope and fear,
We were as weary there as we are here.

"The lights that on the violet sea poured down,
The suns that set behind some far-off town,
Lit in our hearts the unquiet wish to fly
Deep in the glimmering distance of the sky;

"The loveliest countries that rich cities bless,
Never contained the strange wild loveliness
By fate and chance shaped from the floating cloud -- 
And we were always sorrowful and proud!

"Desire from joy gains strength in weightier measure.
Desire, old tree who draw'st thy sap from pleasure,
Though thy bark thickens as the years pass by,
Thine arduous branches rise towards the sky;

"And wilt thou still grow taller, tree more fair
Than the tall cypress?
 -- Thus have we, with care,
"Gathered some flowers to please your eager mood,
Brothers who dream that distant things are good!

"We have seen many a jewel-glimmering throne;
And bowed to Idols when wild horns were blown
In palaces whose faery pomp and gleam
To your rich men would be a ruinous dream;

"And robes that were a madness to the eyes;
Women whose teeth and nails were stained with dyes;
Wise jugglers round whose neck the serpent winds -- -- "

V

And then, and then what more?

VI

	  "O childish minds!

"Forget not that which we found everywhere,
From top to bottom of the fatal stair,
Above, beneath, around us and within,
The weary pageant of immortal sin.

"We have seen woman, stupid slave and proud,
Before her own frail, foolish beauty bowed;
And man, a greedy, cruel, lascivious fool,
Slave of the slave, a ripple in a pool;

"The martyrs groan, the headsman's merry mood;
And banquets seasoned and perfumed with blood;
Poison, that gives the tyrant's power the slip;
And nations amorous of the brutal whip;

"Many religions not unlike our own,
All in full flight for heaven's resplendent throne;
And Sanctity, seeking delight in pain,
Like a sick man of his own sickness vain;

"And mad mortality, drunk with its own power,
As foolish now as in a bygone hour,
Shouting, in presence of the tortured Christ:
'I curse thee, mine own Image sacrificed.'

"And silly monks in love with Lunacy,
Fleeing the troops herded by destiny,
Who seek for peace in opiate slumber furled -- 
Such is the pageant of the rolling world!"

VII

O bitter knowledge that the wanderers gain!
The world says our own age is little and vain;
For ever, yesterday, to-day, to-morrow,
'Tis horror's oasis in the sands of sorrow.

Must we depart? If you can rest, remain;
Part, if you must. Some fly, some cower in vain,
Hoping that Time, the grim and eager foe,
Will pass them by; and some run to and fro

Like the Apostles or the Wandering Jew;
Go where they will, the Slayer goes there too!
And there are some, and these are of the wise,
Who die as soon as birth has lit their eyes.

But when at length the Slayer treads us low,
We will have hope and cry, "'Tis time to go!"
As when of old we parted for Cathay
With wind-blown hair and eyes upon the bay.

We will embark upon the Shadowy Sea,
Like youthful wanderers for the first time free -- 
Hear you the lovely and funereal voice
That sings: O come all ye whose wandering joys
Are set upon the scented Lotus flower,
For here we sell the fruit's miraculous boon;
Come ye and drink the sweet and sleepy power
Of the enchanted, endless afternoon.

VIII

O Death, old Captain, it is time, put forth!
We have grown weary of the gloomy north;
Though sea and sky are black as ink, lift sail!
Our hearts are full of light and will not fail.

O pour thy sleepy poison in the cup!
The fire within the heart so burns us up
That we would wander Hell and Heaven through,
Deep in the Unknown seeking something new!

The Journey

To Maxime du Campe

I

For the child, adoring cards and prints,
The universe fulfils its vast appetite.
Ah, how large is the world in the brightness of lamps,
How small in the eyes of memory!

We leave one morning, brains full of flame, 
Hearts full of malice and bitter desires, 
And we go and follow the rhythm of the waves, 
Rocking our infinite on the finite of the seas:

Some happy to escape a tainted country 
Others, the horrors of their cradles; and a few, 
Astrologers drowned in the eyes of a woman, 
Some tyrannical Circe of dangerous perfumes.

So not to be transformed into animals, they get drunk 
On space and light and skies on fire; 
The biting ice, the suns that turn them copper, 
Slowly blot out the brand of kisses.

But the true travelers are they who depart
For departing's sake; with hearts light as balloons,
They never swerve from their destinies,
Saying continuously, without knowing why: "Let us go on!"

These have passions formed like clouds; 
As a recruit of his gun, they dream 
Of spacious pleasures, transient, little understood, 
Whose name no human spirit knows.

II

It is a terrible thought that we imitate 
The top and the ball in their bounding waltzes; even asleep 
Curiosity tortures and turns us 
Like a cruel angel whipping the sun.

Whimsical fortune, whose end is out of place 
And, being nowhere, can be anywhere! 
Where Man, in whom Hope is never weary, 
Runs ever like a madman searching for repose.

Our soul is a brigantine seeking its Icaria:
A voice resounds on deck: "Open your eyes!"
A hot mad voice from the maintop cries:
"Love. Glory. Fortune!" Hell is a rock.

Each little island sighted by the look-out man 
Becomes another Eldorado, the promise of Destiny; 
Imagination, setting out its revels, 
Finds but a reef in the morning light.

O the poor lover of chimerical lands! 
Must one put him in irons, throw him in the water, 
This drunken sailor, contriver of those Americas 
Whose glimpses make the gulfs more bitter?

Thus the old vagabond, tramping through the mud, 
With his nose in the air, dreams of shining Edens; 
Bewitched his eye finds a Capua 
Wherever a candle glimmers in a hovel.

III

O marvelous travelers! what glorious stories 
We read in your eyes as deep as the seas. 
Show us the caskets of your rich memories 
Those wonderful jewels of stars and stratosphere.

We would travel without wind or sail! 
And so, to gladden the cares of our jails, 
Pass over our spirits, stretched out like canvas, 
Your memories with their frames of horizons.

Tell us, what have you seen?

IV

"We have seen the stars 
And the waves; and we have seen the sands also; 
And, despite shocks and unforeshadowed disasters, 
We have often, as here, grown weary.

The glory of sunlight on the violet sea, 
The glory of cities in the setting sun, 
Lit in our hearts an uneasy desire 
To sink in a sky of enticing reflections.

Never did the richest cities, the grandest countryside,
Hold such mysterious charms
As those chance made amongst the clouds,
And ever passion made as anxious!

 -- Delight adds power to desire.
O desire, you old tree, your pasture is pleasure,
And whilst your bark grows great and hard
Your branches long to see the sun close to!

Do you ever increase, grand tree, you who live
Longer than the cypress? -- Nevertheless, we have carefully
Culled some sketches for your ravenous album,
Brothers finding beauty in all things coming from afar!

We have greeted great horned idols,
Thrones starry with luminous jewels,
Figured palaces whose fairy pomp
Would be a dream of ruin for a banker,

Robes which make the eyes intoxicated; 
Women with tinted teeth and nails 
And cunning jugglers caressed by serpents."

V

And then, what then?

VI

"O childish minds!

Never to forget the principal matter, 
We have everywhere seen, without having sought it, 
From top to bottom of the fatal ladder, 
The wearisome spectacle of immortal sin:

Woman, base slave of pride and stupidity, 
Adores herself without a smile, loves herself with no distaste; 
Man, that gluttonous, lewd tyrant, hard and avaricious, 
Is a slave of the slave, a trickle in the sewer;

The joyful executioner, the sobbing martyr; 
The festival that flavors and perfumes the blood; 
The poisonous power that weakens the oppressor 
And the people craving the agonizing whip;

Many religions like ours 
All scaling the heavens; Sanctity 
Like a tender voluptuary wallowing in a feather bed 
Seeking sensuality in nails and horse-hair;

Fearing Humanity, besotted with its own genius,
Is as mad today as ever it was,
Crying to God in its furious agony:
"O my fellow and my master, I curse thee!"

And the less senseless, brave lovers of Dementia, 
Flee the great herd penned in by Destiny, 
And take refuge in a vast opium!
 -- Such is the eternal report of the whole world."

VII

O bitter is the knowledge that one draws from the voyage!
The monotonous and tiny world, today
Yesterday, tomorrow, always, shows us our reflections,
An oasis of horror in a desert of boredom!

Must we depart? If you can do so, remain;
Depart, if you must. Someone runs, another crouches,
To deceive that vigilant and fatal enemy,
Time! Ah, there are some runners who know no respite,

Like the wandering Jew or like the apostles, 
Whom nothing aids, no cart, nor ship, 
To flee this ugly gladiator; there are: others 
Who even in their cradles know how to kill it.

When at last he shall place his foot upon our spine,
We will be capable of hope, crying: "Forward!"
As in old times we left for China,
Eyes fixed in the distance, halt in the winds,

We shall embark on that sea of Darkness
With the happy heart of a young traveler.
Do you hear these voices, alluring and funereal,
Singing: "This way, those of you who long to eat

The perfumed lotus-leaf! it is here that are gathered
Those miraculous fruits for which your heart hungers;
Do come and get drunk on the strange sweetness
Of this afternoon without end!"

By those familiar accents we discover the phantom 
Over there our personal Pylades stretch out their arms to us.
"Swim to your Electra to revive your hearts!"
Says she whose knees we one time kissed.

VIII

O Death, my captain, it is time! let us raise the anchor! 
This country wearies us, O Death! Let us make ready! 
If sea and sky are both as black as ink, 
You know our hearts are full of sunshine.

Pour on us your poison to refresh us!
Oh, this fire so burns our brains, we would
Dive to the depths of the gulf, Heaven or Hell, what matter?
If only to find in the depths of the Unknown the New!

